Development of methods for the controlled fabrication of nanostructures is currently the greatest challenge in the field of nanoscience and nanotechnology. Recently, much attention has been directed to the use of low dimensional nanostructures such as nanoparticles, nanowires (NWs), and nanotubes, as building blocks in the production of hierarchical nanostructures because of various novel applications. Lieber and colleagues developed a technique for a large-scale hierarchical organization of NWs arrays for integrated nanosystems , whereas Wang and colleagues reported that novel hierarchical nanostructures based on NWs can be used as solar-cells and nanogenerators . Due to characteristic high porosity of hierarchical nanostructures, they also have been studied as photocatalysts and gas sensors . Gas sensing properties of hierarchical nanostructures from metal oxides have been comprehensively reviewed by Lee . To date, the synthesis of hierarchical nanostructures from metal oxides can be classified into three categories. The first method involves high thermal evaporation of precursor powders accompanied by a low-temperature condensation. One-step and multi-steps of the thermal evaporation processes have been employed in the synthesis of different hierarchical nanostructures such as ZnO–ZnO , ZnO–SnO2 , SnO2–SnO2 , and ZnO–In2O3 , and WO3 . The second technique is a wet-chemical route, which is simple, environmentally friendly, operated low-temperatures, inexpensive, and products high-throughput . The third option is a combination of the first two methods . It can be recognized that the hierarchization strategy consists of two-step vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growths are frequently used because the hierarchical NWs can be precisely controlled through the thermal evaporation steps. The first step is to grow the core NWs and the second step is to grow the outer NWs by reseeding of nanoparticle catalysts on the core NWs surface.
Previous studies have reported that hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures are relatively good gas sensors . More or less, the gas sensing properties of hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures prepared by a two-step thermal evaporation process can be enhanced by the deposition of the gold nanoparticles in the core NWs before the second step of the thermal evaporation process. This is likely the materials are functionalized with catalyst active materials (Au catalyst), resulting in the enhancement of gas sensing properties. This study is the first to perform a comparison of SnO2 NWs and hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures. SnO2 NWs are prepared through two different thermal evaporation processes, with one process for core NWs and another for outer secondary NWs. The two-step thermal evaporation process is used to synthesize hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures while excluding the gold catalyst to eliminate any effect it may have on the gas sensing properties of the fabricated hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures. The gas sensing performances of the SnO2 NWs and hierarchical nanostructures are evaluated and compared.
The SnO2 NWs used in this study were synthesized through two different thermal evaporation processes. In the first process, SnO2 NWs were grown at 980 °C on Si substrates that have previously been deposited with Au catalyst, using SnO powder as the source. The second process is similar to the first, except that it was carried out at 800 °C with Sn powder as the source. These two processes, when done in series, produced hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures, initially synthesizing core NWs and then outer nanostructures. Samples grown by the first process were termed as sample A, by the second process as sample B, and those by the two combined processes as sample C. Both processes have been described in detail in our previous studies . In brief, the SnO2 NWs were grown in a quartz tube located in a horizontal furnace (Lingdberg/Blue M, Model: TF55030A, USA). Pure SnO powder (for growing core NWs) or Sn powder (for growing outer NWs) was placed in an alumina boat as the evaporation source. Substrates with a layer of previously deposited Au catalyst by ion sputtering were placed approximately 1.5 cm from the source. Both methods were divided into two steps. Initially, the quartz tube was evacuated to 10−2 Torr and purged several times with high purity Ar gas (99.999%). Subsequently, the quartz tube was evacuated to 10−2 Torr again, and the furnace temperature was increased from room-temperature to 980 °C or 800 °C. When the growth temperature was reached, oxygen gas (99.99%) was added to the quartz tube at a flow rate of 0.3–0.5 sccm, while maintaining a pressure of ∼2–5 Torr inside the tube. The growth temperature was maintained for 30 min. The morphology and crystal structure of SnO2 NW and hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures were investigated through field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL). The XRD (Philips Xpert Pro) was operated with a CuKα radiation generated at 40 kV. The PL spectra were acquired at room-temperature from 360 to 910 nm using a 325 nm He–Cd laser.
To characterize the gas sensing properties, synthesized SnO2 NWs and hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures were dispersed in ethanol and deposited on a pre-fabricated interdigitated electrode substrate using a micropipette. Numerous drops were placed on the electrode to generate a thick film of each of the samples, which can eliminate the effect of SnO2 NWs film thickness and NWs density on gas sensing performance . The sensor fabricated from the SnO2 NWs grown at 980 °C was denoted as sensor A, that from SnO2 NWs grown at 800 °C was denoted as sensor B, and that from the hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures was denoted as sensor C.
The gas sensing properties were studied by measuring all the sensors with liquid petroleum gas (LPG, 500–2000 ppm) and NH3 (300–1000 ppm) at different temperatures (50–450 °C) using a homemade set up (Fig. 1 ) with high speed switching gas flow (from/to air to/from balance gas). Balance gases (0.1% in air) were purchased from Air Liquid Group, Singapore. The system employed a flow-through with a constant rate of 200 sccm.
FE-SEM images of SnO2 NWs, samples A and B, are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. The morphologies of NWs synthesized through different techniques do not differ from each other. Structural images of hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures, sample C, are shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d). The morphology of hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures is distinct compared with SnO2 NWs. Core NWs appear distorted, and other NWs and nanobelts (NBs) seem to branch from them. Results are completely different from a previous report . This can be attributed to the modified procedure, where Au nanoparticles are not reseeded during the second growth process. This is verified by the similarity of the results reported in literature and the results obtained (Fig. 2(e) and (f)), in which Au nanoparticles were deposited on the core NWs as reseeding catalysts for the outer NWs growth. The growth mechanism of SnO2 core NWs with Au nanoparticles as catalysts had initially been elucidated by Wagner and Ellis based on the vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) process, followed by many researchers . We believe that the branched NWs/NBs were grown by a catalyst-free vapor–solid (VS) process because the secondary outer NWs/NBs can be directly formed from the vapor phase in the absence of the catalyst . The following growth mechanism is proposed: some small Sn droplets from Sn vapor attach to the surface of the core NWs and form new growth sites. Once the Sn droplets completely attach to the surface of core NWs and become nucleation sites, epitaxial growth of branched NWs/NBs takes place. The branching pattern generated is not uniform because the Sn droplets were not homogeneous. Core NWs become distorted because of the oxidation of liquid Sn droplets coated the core NWs to SnO2.
Fig. 3 shows the XRD patterns of the samples. All the diffraction peaks for the products match the tetragonal rutile SnO2 profile (a = 4.738 and c = 3.187) obtained from the JCPDS 77–0450 card. As such, nanostructures consist predominantly of pure SnO2. We have observed that the NWs density of the sample A was lower than that of sample B. This is an explanation why the peaks from sample A have lower intensity than that from sample B.
There are several papers in the literature that report on the luminescence spectra of SnO2 with different morphologies . It is recognized that oxygen vacancies play important roles in these luminescence bands as well as gas sensing properties. For these reasons, the room-temperature PL spectra of the SnO2 NWs from samples A, B, and C were characterized. Fig. 4 shows the room temperature PL spectra acquired from the samples. All spectra show a strong visible PL band at 620 nm, which has been consistently attributed to oxygen vacancies that are essential defects of metal oxides . Despite the morphological differences between SnO2 NWs and their hierarchical nanostructures, the same PL results are obtained from these samples. The reason for this is unclear, and further studies are necessary to obtain a plausible explanation. However, the hypothesis explanation is that the oxygen vacancies and sizes of nanowires and hierarchical nanostructures may not be much different.
To investigate and compare the gas sensing properties of SnO2 NWs and hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures, sensors were tested at different temperatures ranging from 50 to 450 °C with an interval of 50 °C to optimize working temperature. Responses were measured with LPG and NH3 gas at concentrations of 2000 and 1000 ppm, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5 , the temperature has an obvious influence on the response of the sensors to LPG and NH3 gas. The bell-shaped distribution of response against operating temperature reveals that optimum performance is achieved at 350 and 200 °C for LPG and NH3 gas, respectively. Previous work has also reported bell-shaped sensor responses . The maximum response values to 2000 ppm LPG and 1000 ppm NH3 gas were 6, 6.2, 20.4 and 7.1, 7.9, 21.7 for sensors A, B, and C, respectively. For both gases, the hierarchical SnO2 nanostructure exhibits a response that is three times that of the SnO2 NWs sensors at the optimal operating temperatures. Responses of the two SnO2 NW sensors are very similar, mainly because their morphologies and wire diameters are alike (Fig. 2). Comparing the response of sensor C to the two gases (LPG, NH3), temperature can be used to selectively detect NH3. For instance, at 200 °C, the response of sensor C to 1000 ppm NH3 is about 21.7, whereas its response to 2000 ppm LPG is about 2.5.
After the optimized temperature was determined, response patterns to different gas concentrations were investigated. The three sensors were tested at 350 °C with LPG concentrations of 500, 1000, and 2000 ppm. Fig. 6(a)–(c) shows the dynamic response-recovery curves of sensors A, B, and C to LPG, respectively. The response amplitudes of all the sensors increase with increasing gas concentration [Fig. 6(d)]. As expected, compared with SnO2 NW sensors, the sensor based on hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures (sensor C) exhibits enhanced responses for each concentration. Fig. 7 presents the results of testing the sensors at 200 °C with NH3 concentrations of 300, 400, 500, 750 and 1000 ppm. It can be seen that hierarchical nanostructures sensor has a higher response to NH3 gas. This can be implied that the enhanced gas sensing response of the hierarchical nanostructures is relevant to other gases.
It has been demonstrated that the response (S = R a/R g) of oxide semiconductors is usually depicted as : S∼β[C]α where β denotes a constant, and [C] means the concentration of the target gas. In practical, the α is in range from 1/2 to 1, dependent on the charge of the surface species, the stoichiometry of the elementary reactions on the surface and measurement range of the target gas. For the case of one-dimensional nanostructure SnO2, which has a good response to various gases, the α value can be around 1 . In our case, we have also found that the sensor response to LPG and NH3 seem to be shown a linear relationship with gas concentration in the measured range (see Figs. 6(d) and 7(d)).
We have measured the sensor response with relative large number of gas pulse sequence and did not find out any change in the sensor response and the base-resistance of the sensor (data not shown). This can imply that the performance of the hierarchical nanostructure sensors has good repeatability and the hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures materials are promising candidates for gas sensing applications. We have made comparison LPG and NH3 response of our SnO2 NWs and SnO2 hierarchical nanostructures sensors as presented in Tables 1 and 2 , respectively. It can be seen that the responses of SnO2 hierarchical nanostructures to LPG and NH3 are comparable with reported values . However, SnO2 hierarchical nanostructures have not yet optimized for practical application. The sensor performance can be improved further by functionalization with active catalysts nanoparticles for detection of LPG and NH3 gas.
The mechanism of enhanced gas sensing performance of hierarchical nanostructures is still unclear. Q. Wan et al. reported that branched SnO2 NW sensors have higher responses to ethanol than general SnO2 NW sensors . However, we believe that the Au catalyst previously deposited in the second growth step of SnO2 branches may have had a role in enhancing the gas sensing performance. This is likely the case with SnO2 NWs functionalized with nanoparticle catalysts . Recently, the gas sensing performance of ZnO NWs and hierarchical ZnO nanostructures were compared, and the gas response enhancement of the latter was established and explained . Since the gas sensing mechanisms of ZnO and SnO2 nanostructures are very similar, enhancement of the gas sensing performance of SnO2 hierarchical nanostructures can be attributed to (i) higher porosity, (ii) more active centers obtained from enhanced oxygen vacancy defects, and (iii) junctions of the core and outer NWs/NBs. To clearly understand the enhancement of gas sensing properties of the hierarchical nanostructures, we first explain the gas sensing mechanism of SnO2 NWs sensors. As depicted in Fig. 8 , when SnO2 NWs is exposed in air, oxygen molecules will adsorb on the surface and capture electrons from the conductance band of the NWs to become oxygen ions (active surface complexes). The adsorbed oxygen ions on the SnO2 NWs act as electron acceptors that generate a surface depletion region on the surface of the NWs. The width of the depletion region is sensitive to the ambient gases. As exposed to LPG and NH3 gas (donated electrons molecules), the reactions between these molecules and the active chemical complexes (oxygen ions) on the surface will lead to the release of the trapped electrons, resulting in a decrease of the depletion width. This leads to a decrease of the resistance of along the longitudinal SnO2 NWs. However, our SnO2 NWs sensors are a network type and there are many NWs bridge between the two Pt electrodes forming many networking points of SnO2–SnO2 NWs (see Fig. 8(a)). The potential barrier around the networking points are blocked the electrons flow in a more efficient way compared with the depletion region on the surface. Because the barriers, with adjustable thickness and height, control the transport of electrons between the NWs through the equation : R=R0expeΔVbkbT
In this equation, ΔV b is the change of the barrier potential defined as the potential in air minus that in target gas, R 0 is a factor including the resistance in air and other parameters, e is the charge of an electron, k b is Boltzmann's constant, and T is the absolute temperature. When the sensors are exposed to LPG and NH3, not only the depletion width on the surface of the NWs, but also the height of the barrier potential at the networking point contact will decrease. From the schematic illustration of gas sensing mechanism of SnO2 NWs and their hierarchical nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b), we can clearly see that the hierarchical nanostructures have a higher porosity and more active sites compared to the SnO2 WNs sensor. More importantly, the hierarchical nanostructures sensor has much higher network point contacts (see Fig. 8(b)). This can be dominant factor in enhancing the gas sensing properties of the hierarchical nanostructures.
For practical applications, the response and recovery times of the gas sensors are very important concerns. Fig. 9 (a) and (b) shows the plots of the dynamic resistance responses of the three sensors to 1000 ppm LPG and 300 ppm NH3 gas, respectively. The 90% response time for gas exposure [t 90%(air-to-gas)] and that for recovery [t 90%(gas-to-air)] were calculated from the resistance-time data shown in Fig. 9. The t 90%(air-to-gas) values for LPG and NH3 gas are around 4 and 17 s, respectively, whereas the t 90%(gas-to-air) values for LPG and NH3 gas are around 9 and 30 s, respectively. For each of the gases, response and recovery times do not differ greatly from each other. These tests were performed at the corresponding optimal temperatures of the sensors, which may have contributed to the differences in values between the different gases.
This study demonstrated the use of a two-step thermal evaporation method in synthesizing hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures for gas sensing applications. Gas sensors fabricated from SnO2 NWs and their hierarchical nanostructures were used to study and compare the gas sensing performance of the different nanostructures. Comparative gas sensing tests showed that hierarchical nanostructures exhibit enhanced gas sensing performance, which may be attributed to high porosity, more active sites, and addition of core–outer junctions to the materials. Thus, synthesized hierarchically porous SnO2 nanostructures have a great potential for gas sensor applications, in addition to being used as photocatalysts and anode material for lithium-ion batteries. Moreover, this work provides a simple and controllable approach that can be extended to the synthesis of other hierarchical nanotructures based on metal oxide materials, such as SnO2, In2O3, ZnO, WO3, and TiO2.