Aromatic amines, such as aniline and its substituted derivatives, are generally dangerous because of their toxicity and carcinogenicity or else they can be converted into toxic N-nitroso compounds through reactions with nitrosylating agents in the environment . These contaminants may be released as chemical residues of dyestuffs, cosmetics, medicines and rubber manufacture and also as by-products of energy technologies such as coal-conversion waste processing . Chlorinated anilines such as p-chloroaniline and 3,4-dichloroaniline were also found as degradation products and intermediates of various phenylurea and phenylcarbamate pesticides . In view of the importance of these compounds, a rapid and sensitive method of analysis is needed to detect them in the environment.
Several methods have been developed for the determination of anilines in environmental samples. Gas chromatography (GC) is a classical method , and presently GC–mass spectrometry (MS) is often used . For non-volatile aniline compounds high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) may be used with fluorescence detection after derivatization , or with amperometric detection . Some sample preparation techniques have been reported for the pretreatment of anilines in aqueous samples based on solid-phase extraction (SPE) . In the past years, solid-phase microextraction (SPME) has emerged as a versatile solvent-free alternative to SPE procedures. In recent years, a novel technique termed liquid-phase microextraction (LPME) has been developed. However a fast simple preconcentration and microextraction method, DLLME has been presented in 2006 for determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), organophosphorus pesticides (OPPs) and chlorobenzenes (CBs) in water samples and for the first time, simultaneous DLLME and derivatization combined with gas chromatography-electroncapture detection (GC-ECD) were studied for the analysis of 19 chlorophenols (CPs) in water samples . In this method, the appropriate mixture of extraction solvent and disperser solvent are injected into the aqueous sample (5 ml) by syringe, rapidly. Therefore, cloudy solution is formed. In fact, it is consisted of fine particles of extraction solvent which is dispersed entirely into aqueous phase. After centrifuging, the fine particles of extraction solvent are sedimented in the bottom of the conical test tube. The advantages of DLLME method are simplicity of operation, rapidity, low-cost, high-recovery, and enrichment factor.
In the present work, simultaneous DLLME and derivatization have been carried out in one-step for the analysis of anilines in water samples at the sub-ppb level and various parameters affecting the extraction efficiency were also investigated in this study.
All chemicals used in this study were reagent grade, aniline and 4-chloroaniline were obtained (purity > 99%) from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland), 3-chloro-2-methylaniline and 3,5-dichloroaniline were purchased (purity ≧ 98%) from Sigma–Aldrich (Portugal). Derivatization reagent pentafluorobenzaldehyde (PFBAY) was purchased from Alfa-Aesar (Ward Hill, MA, USA), chlorobenzene (J.T. Baker, Mallinckrodt, Baker), tetrachloroethylene (J.T. Baker, Mallinckrodt, Baker), tetrachlorocarbon (Showa Chemicals, Tokyo, Japan), acetone (Echo, Maioli, Taiwan), acetonitrile (J.T. Baker, Mallinckrodt, Baker), and methanol (Echo, Maioli, Taiwan) were also used for this study.
The stock solutions were prepared by adding approximately 3 mg of analytes into vials and diluted to 10 ml with methanol. The stock solutions were kept storage at 4 °C. Before extraction, stock solutions were diluted with blank stream water to aqueous standard of 33 μg/l (aniline), 57 μg/l (4-chloroaniline), 62 μg/l (3-chloro-2-methylaniline), and 48 μg/l (3,5-dichloroaniline) for the optimization experiments. A waste water from Tou Cian stream (Hsinchu, Taiwan) served as the environmental sample.
Analysis was carried-out using a gas chromatograph Agilent (Wilmington, Delaware, USA) 6850 with split/splitless injector operated at 250 °C in pulse splitless mode (1 min), mass detector Agilent (Wilmington, Delaware, USA) 5978B. A 30 m HP-5MS (J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA, USA) fused silica capillary column (0.25 mm I.D., 0.25 μm film thickness) was used for separation. The column oven was initially held at 70 °C, raised to 295 °C at 15 °C/min, held at 295 °C for 1 min. The carrier gas was helium (purity 99.9995%); it was further purified by passage through a superior helium gas purifier Agilent (Wilmington, DE, USA) model RMSH-2. A Sorvall 5C Plus Centrifuge (Global Medical, Ramsey, MN, USA) was used.
All of the 10 ml screw cap conical bottomed glass test tubes (extraction vessel) were manufactured by Ching Fa glass factory (Hsingchu, Taiwan).
Deionized water was prepared using a Milli-Q (Millipore, MA, USA) purification system.
In the simultaneous DLLME and derivatization, an aliquot of 5 ml of a blank stream solution containing 33 μg/l (aniline), 57 μg/l (4-chloroaniline), 62 μg/l (3-chloro-2-methylaniline), and 48 μg/l (3,5-dichloroaniline) was placed in a 10 ml screw cap conical bottomed glass test tube. An aliquot of 0.5 ml of acetone (disperser solvent) containing 8.75 μl chlorobenzene (extraction solvent) and 10 μl methanol containing PFBAY (30 g/l, derivatization reagent) was injected rapidly into the aqueous solution with a 1 ml syringe (gastight, Hamilton, Reno, NV, USA) and a 10 μl syringe (gastight, Hamilton, Reno, NV, USA), then the mentioned mixture was kept in a water bath (30 °C). Dispersed fine droplets of chlorobenzene form a cloudy solution. In this step, anilines and PFBAY were extracted into the fine droplet of chlorobenzene rapidly and derivatized in the chlorobenzene, in 20 min. After centrifugation for 2 min at 6000 rpm, fine droplets of extraction solvent were sedimented at the bottom of the conical test tube. The volume of the sedimented phase was determined to approximately 2 ± 0.2 μl. The sedimented phase (2 μl) was injected into GC for separation and analysis.
For evaluating the pretreatment procedure, the sensitivities of two experiments were compared. In the first experiment, derivatization reagent was added to aqueous sample containing anilines to proceed derivative reaction for 20 min, then 0.5 ml acetone including 8.75 μl chlorobenzene was injected into above aqueous sample and then the centrifugation was proceeded in 2 min. In the second experiment, simultaneous DLLME and derivatization, 0.5 ml acetone including 8.75 μl chlorobenzene and derivatization reagent were injected into aqueous sample spiked with anilines, and then centrifugation was proceeded after 20 min. As shown in Fig. 1 , better sensitivity was obtained, except for 3,5-dichloroaniline with similar sensitivity, with simultaneous DLLME and derivatization. It was inferred that difference of sensitivity of anilines between experiment 1 and 2 should be affected by the solubility of anilines in water (Table 1 ) . Therefore simultaneous derivatization and extraction was decided to be the pretreatment procedure.
In DLLME method, some characteristics of extraction solvent such as low solubility in water, extraction capability of interested compounds, good chromatographic behavior and higher density than water must be achieved. Thus there are extra limitations on the selection of extraction solvent in DLLME method. Most of the halogenated solvents own above properties.
To obtain the better extraction efficiency, chlorobenzene, tetrachloroethylene, and tetrachlorocarbon were tested as extraction solvents. A 5 ml of aqueous sample containing the target compounds were extracted using the procedure described above.
As shown in Fig. 2 , the extraction efficiency of aniline and 4-chloroaniline extracted with tetrachlorocarbon were higher than other solvents but from the view of average sensitivity for these four analytes, chlorobenzene was selected as the extraction solvent.
Disperser solvent should be miscible in water; also it should dissolve the extraction solvent. Thus acetone and acetonitrile were selected as disperser solvents to investigate the effect of these solvents on the performance of DLLME.
When acetone and acetonitrile were tested as disperser solvents containing chlorobenzene to inject into aqueous sample, as shown in the following result (Fig. 3 ), extraction efficiency of acetone was similar to acetonitrile but acetone was less toxic, referred with LC50, than acetonitrile . Consequently, the acetone was selected as disperser solvent because of less toxicity and cheaper.
For investigating the effect of volume of disperser solvent on extraction efficiency, various volumes of acetone (0.5, 1, 1.5 ml) containing (10, 13, 16.5 μl) chlorobenzene were performed, respectively. Increasing the volume of chlorobenzene by increasing the volume of acetone is required to obtain the constant volume of the sedimented phase (3 ± 0.2 μl). As shown in Fig. 4 , the optimized sensitivity was achieved when 0.5 ml acetone and 10 μl of chlorobenzene were used.
Increasing extraction solvent would increase extracted amount of analytes, however the concentration of analytes in the sedimented phase were also diluted. For enhancing sensitivity, 2 μl of sedimented phase was injected to GC–MS. Over 2 μl of injection would cause peak broaden. Here 8.75 and 10 μl of extraction solvent was used to study for obtaining the effect of 2 and 3 μl of sedimented phase on extraction efficiency. There is no considerable change on the extraction efficiency of these anilines between 8.75 and 10 μl of extraction solvent. Consequently, 8.75 μl chlorobenzene was selected.
In this work, the matrices in the river water would influence derivatization and extraction efficiency. Here, different pH values (4, 4.6, 5, 7.8) in sample solution were adjusted to investigate the derivatization and extraction efficiency. The lower sensitivity of stream water (pH 7.8) was observed. Higher sensitivity was acquired as lowering pH value, however sensitivity descended below pH 4.6. As shown in Fig. 5 , the better derivatization and extraction efficiency would be obtained at pH 4.6.
In simultaneous extraction and derivatization with DLLME, raising temperature would cause different derivatization performance and solubility of analytes in aqueous. Here, various extraction and derivatization temperatures were investigated to obtain the better extraction efficiency. As shown in Fig. 6 , the sensitivity decreased by increasing extraction and derivatization temperature from 30 to 60 °C. Thus 30 °C was used for further study.
In simultaneous extraction and derivatization with DLLME, dispersed fine droplets of chlorobenzene form a cloudy solution and the surface area between extraction solvent and aqueous phase (water sample) is very large. Transition of anilines and PFBAY from aqueous phase (water sample) to extraction solvent is fast enough to let a quick achieve of the equilibrium state. Thereby, most of the required time was for derivatization of anilines with PFBAY.
Various experiments were performed in the range of 0–50 min to obtain the better extraction efficiency. As shown in Fig. 7 , there is no considerable change on the sensitivity of these anilines after 20 min and 20 min was selected for extraction and derivatization time.
The characteristics of analytes were listed in Table 2 . Enrichment factors, which were defined as formula 1, achieved by the DLLME procedure were 212–645-fold. The linearity of the DLLME for blank water samples of anilines detected by GC–MS was investigated with spiked concentrations of analytes ranging from 0.25 to 70 μg/l; and method detection limits (MDLs), which were calculated as three times the standard deviation of five replicated runs of spiked samples at lowest concentration of calibration curve, were in the range 0.04–0.09 μg/l. Correlation coefficients, (R 2) values, were between 0.9955 and 0.9985. Linear equation was used to calculate R 2 for GC–MS. The range of the relative standard deviations is 5.8–11.8% (Table 3 ): enrichmentfactor=VsCsVaqC0 where C s is the concentration of analytes in sediment phase after extraction, V s the volume of sediment phase for injecting to GC, V aq the volume of sample solution and C 0 is the initial concentration of analytes in aqueous sample before extraction.
The optimum condition for each factor may be inter-related. The conditions we finally selected may not be the optimum. However, we have checked back and forth the conditions from time to time. For instance, the data shown in Fig. 1 should be run at the beginning of the experiment. We have re-run the experiment using the selected conditions we found at the final stage. In Fig. 2, the selectivity for the less sensitive analytes, 3-chloro-2-methylaniline and 3,5-dichloroaniline, was much better as using chlorobenzene for extraction solvent, it therefore may not absolutely required to check it once again. For Fig. 3, the extraction efficiencies were similar using acetone or acetonitrile. Acetone was selected as disperser solvent because of less toxic and cheaper (Refs. ). Similar situation can be found from the date shown in other figures.
Stream waste water sample was filtered through a filter paper before analysis. The aqueous samples were extracted with DLLME under the selected conditions. The selected conditions were listed as below: (1) disperser solvent, acetone; (2) extraction solvent, chlorobenzene; (3) amount of disperser solvent, 0.5 ml; (4) amount of extraction solvent, 8.75 μl; (5) pH value of sample solution, 4.6; (6) derivatization and extraction temperature, 30 °C; (7) derivatization and extraction time, 20 min. No anilines were detected in the stream water samples (Tou Cian stream) neighbor to the dye factory tested. The relative recoveries defined as the peak area ratio between blank stream water and the tested stream water sample, which was free of the analytes, spiked at the same concentration (2.5, 2.5, 5, 5 μg/l) was found to be 69–94% (Table 3). No analytes were detected in the stream waste water sample (Fig. 8 ).
This work indicates that a selective trace enrichment of carcinogenic anilines from river water samples can be achieved by a DLLME method. The newly developed microextraction technique has distinct advantages over conventional methods with respect to extraction time and volume of solvents required, and low detection limits are readily achieved. This proposed sample preparation procedure is much simpler than the conventional LLE, SPE, and SPME.