The synthesis and application of low-dimensional semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs), consisting of inorganic compounds with nanometer dimensions, is attracting a lot of attention in recent years . In particular, luminescent semiconductor nanocrystals, or “quantum dots” (QDs), have generated a great interest in fundamental research and also in their applications in optoelectronics, analytical chemistry, etc.
A quantum dot is a semiconductor particle that has all three dimensions confined to the nanometer length scale [2]. Because of their small size (1–10 nm) these materials display unique properties unlike the bulk material, due to quantum-size confinement effects, which occur when metal and semiconductor particles are smaller than their exciton Bohr radii [3,4]. The strong confinement of excited electrons and holes leads to dramatically different optical and electronic properties compared to the bulk semiconductor. These usually non-fluorescing compounds develop an intense and long-lasting emission excitable by UV and visible light. Compared with organic fluorescent dyes, the QDs exhibit important advantages, including large fluorescence quantum yields, narrow and Gaussian emission spectra (full height wide maximum ~30 nm), tunable maximum wavelength of emission by controlling the QD size (varying the size from 1 to 7 nm allows most visible colours to be generated) and less susceptibility to photobleaching
Since the first reports using modified core–shell QDs as fluorescence labels to stain biological samples many publications have appeared reporting applications of such nanostructures as luminescent indicators of different biological processes (e.g. detection of specific receptor–ligand interactions in cells, fluoroimmunoassays and recognition of biotoxins) . Attempts to extend the use of QDs as a new class of luminophores for their use in chemical sensing are now starting [2].
So far, very few reports of chemical sensing of small molecules and ions with QDs, via analyte-induced changes in photoluminescence, have been reported. Because the photoluminescence of QDs arises from the recombination of the exciton, it is reasonable to assume that the change of surface charges or components of QDs caused by the chemical or physical interaction between ions or small molecules and QDs affects the efficiency of core electron–hole recombination . In this vein, the effect of butylamine as hole acceptor inducing the quenching of the QDs luminescence has been reported . Also, Diaz et al. showed that binding of MoS4 2− anions to the surface of CdS nanoparticles causes a red-shift of their absorption and emission bands as a result of effective electronic interaction of the modifier with the surface and core states of the CdS nanoparticles. In a recent paper, the photoluminescence of CdSe nanocrystals incorporated into poly(methylmethacrylate) films was found to respond reversibly to amines in gaseous phase .
Colloidal CdSe and CdS quantum dots are so far most studied, due to their tunable emission in the visible range, the advances in their preparation, and their potential use for industrial and biomedical applications. Coating the surface of these nanocrystals with suitable surface ligands has profound effects on the photoluminescence response of the QDs to some chemical species. In fact, one of the first practical uses of QDs as chemical sensing materials was described for the determination of zinc and copper ions in aqueous media. This application took advantage of the enhancement by zinc and the quenching by copper of the observed luminescence of CdS quantum dots capped with different organic ligands . More recently, peptide-coated CdS quantum dots have been synthesized for optical detection of Cu(II) and Ag(I) . Expanding applications of QDs to develop inorganic anion sensors is a topic of current interest. Particularly, anion recognition chemistry based on chemical and supramolecular recognition interactions has been an active research field for many years. However, to our knowledge, the use of QDs or nanocrystals as selective luminophor indicators for anion detection is almost unexplored. In fact, a few years ago, Lakowicz et al. reported the quenching effect of iodide on the fluorescence of CdS. However, a high concentration of the anion (0.2 M) was used for the detection of QD luminescence changes, being such concentration too high for practical analytical applications.
The synthesis of red photoluminescent CdSe quantum dots, their surface modification with tert-butyl-N-(2-mercaptoethyl)-carbamate (BMC) and their potential application, as a selective fluorescent probe, for the determination of free cyanide are reported in this work.
All chemical reagents were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification.
Cadmium oxide (99.99%), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, 99%), trioctylphosphine (TOP, 90%), selenium (powder, 100 mesh, 99.99%), BMC, anhydrous methanol and anhydrous chloroform were purchased from Aldrich (Milwaukee, WI, USA). Hexylphosphonic acid (HPA) was obtained from Alfa Aesar (Karlsruhe, Germany) and the tetrabutylammonium salts of the different anions studied (CN−, NO3 −, Cl−, SCN− and Br−) were from Fluka (Madrid, Spain).
The selenium stock solution was prepared in an Ar-filled dry-box by dissolving 0.12 g of selenium powder in 6 g (7.22 ml) of TOP, to produce a 0.21 M stock solution of trioctylphosphine selenide (TOPSe) .
CdSe quantum dots ranging from 2 to 7 nm in diameter were synthesized via the procedure described by Peng et al. using CdO as precursor, although some slight modifications were made here. Briefly, 0.03 g of CdO, 0.11 g of HPA and 3.5 g of TOPO were loaded into a 25 ml glass flask. The mixture was heated to 300–320 °C under argon flow for 15–20 min, and CdO was dissolved in HPA and TOPO. The temperature of the solution was then cooled to 270 °C, 1.2 ml selenium stock solution was swiftly injected and a change of solution color to red was observed. After injection, nanocrystals were left to grew for about 20 min at 250 °C.
Yellow and brown QDs were also prepared in a similar way by varying the ratio of CdO to Se used (yellow QDs were obtained for 0.0396 g of CdO, while brown QDs were obtained for 0.0254 g of CdO, employed in the synthesis). Yellow QDs were obtained when a molar ratio CdO/Se of 1.20 was ensured during the synthesis process, while red and brown QDs were obtained varying the amount of CdO added in order to obtain molar ratios CdO/Se of 0.90 and 0.77, respectively. After cooling the solution up to room temperature, the QDs solution was transferred to a glass vial and diluted with chloroform (to obtain a final volume of approximately 10 ml). Then, the synthesized QDs were purified by adding 5 ml of methanol to 3 ml of the QDs solution in a 10 ml tube. After sonication in a ultrasonic bath for 2–4 min (until homogenization of the mixture), the solution was centrifuged (at about 15,000 rpm), in order to separate the QDs by precipitation. Afterwards, the supernatant liquid phase was decanted to remove any excess of reagents. The purified QD nanocrystals were then dispersed in 10 ml of anhydrous chloroform.
For the surface modification of the quantum dots, about 20 mg of purified CdSe QDs were added into 15 ml methanol solution containing 1.0 ml BMC and 1.5 ml tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (~25%). The solution was refluxed for 24 h. The modified QDs were then separated and purified as previously described and then dispersed in methanol.
Once the synthesis is finished, the QDs (both modified and unmodified) nanocrystal properties remained unaltered after the purification process (including repeated dissolution and precipitations). Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the synthesized BMC-CdSe QDs.
CdSe QDs are insoluble in many typical solvents, but the synthesized QDs, following the described procedure (using TOP/TOPO) are soluble in chloroform. Besides, the obtained BMC-CdSe QDs are soluble in methanol (due to the nature of the organic ligand that favors the QDs solubilization in such solvent).
Synthesized QDs were stored in glass vials in the darkness and, as a rule, exposed to sunlight under ambient conditions for a minimum of 2 days before use. In some experiments, the QDs methanolic solution was placed in a conventional luminescence quartz cell and exposed to a 400 nm light in the sample compartment of the luminometer.
Most of the reagents used during the synthesis of the different QDs are toxic. Protective clothing and gloves should be worn. Also eye/face protection should be used. No other special safety precautions are necessary if the reagents are used correctly. Particularly, cadmium oxide and TOPO are highly toxic reagents. Special care should be taken to avoid release of these reagents to the environment. These materials and the containers must be disposed as hazardous waste.
UV–VIS absorption spectra were obtained using a Perkin-Elmer Lambda-20 UV–VIS spectrophotometer. The luminescence spectra were measured on a Perkin-Elmer LS-50B luminescence spectrometer. Dilute solutions of QDs in methanol were placed in 1 cm quartz cuvettes and their absorption and corresponding fluorescence were measured.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments were carried out with JEOL-2000EX II high resolution electron microscope to obtain high-resolution images of individual QDs. Samples were prepared by placing one drop of a dilute solution of QDs in methanol onto a copper grid supporting a thin plastic film and then removing the remaining solvent in about 2 min with the help of a hot air flux.
Luminescence lifetime measurements were performed with a home-made frequency-domain luminometer based on a laser excitation source (337 nm) and a photomultiplier tube as light detector (at 565 nm). Lifetimes were obtained from the measurement of the phase shift of the excitation light and the luminescence emission [29].
First of all, the spectral properties of the surface-modified BMC-CdSe NPs were investigated as a function of the ratio CdO to Se selected during the synthesis of CdSe quantum dots. Fig. 2 a shows the observed absorption spectra of the three different BMC-CdSe quantum dots dispersed in methanol solution. As expected, the absorption spectral characteristics of the synthesized BMC-CdSe QDs were considerably influenced by the CdO to Se molar ratio (which influences the nanoparticle size). As can be seen, the first excitonic band is situated at 526 nm for the yellow QDs (ratio CdO/Se: 1.20), at 552 nm for the red QDs (ratio CdO/Se: 0.90) and at 580 nm for the brown QDs (ratio CdO/Se: 0.77). Modifications of the surface of the QDs (e.g. functionalization of the QDs surface with the organic ligand) did not produce noticeable changes of the absorption spectra. In fact, the observed unmodified CdSe QDs absorption spectra were similar to those of surface-modified BMC-CdSe QDs.
Luminescence properties of the QDs were also investigated. As can be seen in Fig. 2b, BMC-CdSe quantum dots dispersed in methanol exhibit a strong fluorescence emission at 551 nm (yellow QDs), 590 nm (red QDs) and 647 nm (brown QDs) under 400 nm light excitation. As noticed for the UV–VIS absorption spectra, fluorescence spectra of modified BMC-CdSe QDs were similar to the spectra obtained for pure CdSe QDs. Luminescence lifetimes of surface-modified BMC-CdSe QDs in methanol were also measured and turned out to be rather long (from 300 to 600 ns).
The particle sizes of the synthesized QDs were measured from high resolution transmission electron microscopy images. Fig. 3a shows the TEM image of the obtained red CdSe QDs, with their surface modified with BMC, in methanolic solution. Almost spherical particles were observed. TEM images indicate diameters of the functionalized CdSe nanoparticles between 2 and 7 nm. However, it is worth noting that only a small percentage of the total particles showed a diameter size greater than 5 nm.
Besides, some large particles (Fig. 3b) are also apparent in the Figure, indicating aggregation of NPs. These aggregates may be formed at relatively high QD concentrations (most likely during the solvent evaporation process of TEM experiments) via interconnection of the BMC capped CdSe QDs to form a three-dimensional CdSe QDs network.
It was noticed that exposure of the QDs to sunlight affected drastically their final fluorescence emission. Fig. 4 shows the observed effect of sunlight exposure time on the luminescence intensity and wavelength emission of red CdSe quantum dots. As can be seen, exposure of the red CdSe quantum dots chloroformic solutions to sunlight resulted in a considerable and continuous increase of the measured luminescence intensity, along with a blue-shift of the emission spectra (the solution color became canary yellow).
As uncoated CdSe QDs, the surface-modified BMC-CdSe QDs exhibited initially slight fluorescence. However, once exposed to sunlight, under ambient conditions for at least two days, BMC-CdSe QDs methanol solutions displayed intense fluorescent emission. Moreover, the emission wavelength maximum changed from 580 to about 550 nm (or even to shorter wavelengths).
This effect of photo-activation of semiconductor QDs irradiated with low-power light, resulting in the enhancement of luminescence intensity and in the blue-shifting of emission wavelength maximum, is a phenomenon reported in recent literature . Different mechanisms including photoinduced surface reconstruction of the surface atoms of the nanocrystals or the optimization of surface-ligand passivation induced by photon–photon coupling have been proposed for this photoinduced activation [19], but the exact mechanism is not clear yet.
After photo-activation for several days to obtain a constant emission signal the synthesized BMC-CdSe QDs did not exhibit significant changes neither in their luminescence emission intensity nor in their sensitivity to cyanide, even after more that 2 months stored in the dark, at ambient conditions. Analytical measurements were carried out after the irradiated QDs luminescence signal was stable.
When the sunlight photoactivated surface-modified BMC-CdSe quantum dots were exposed to 400 nm light in a conventional fluorescence quartz cell under sealed conditions (using a Parafilm® cover), the luminescence intensity did not change remarkably with exposure in the time interval investigated (about 4 h). However, when QDs were under contact with air (in an open quartz cell), luminescence intensity decayed slowly with time of exposure, as shown in Fig. 5 (probably the presence of oxygen results in photooxidation).
To investigate the photo-activated luminescence process further, once measured the fluorescence of 3 ml methanolic solution of BMC-CdSe QDs the quantum dots were precipitated by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm during 2 h. After precipitation, the luminescence of both, the supernatant and the solution resulting from re-dispersion of QDs in 3 ml methanol were measured. Fig. 6 shows the results.
As can be seen in Fig. 6, no significant luminescence emission was recorded coming from the supernatant or from methanol solutions. In other words, observed luminescence does not come from other possible chemical components in solution. As can be seen, re-dispersed NPs in methanol did exhibit again an intense fluorescence, confirming that recorded luminescence derives from the BMC-CdSe nanoparticles (rather than brought about by possible adsorbed components used in the preparation of the QDs). The observed loss of luminescence intensity of re-dispersed QDs in methanol (Fig. 6) is probably due to some adsorption of quantum dots onto centrifugation tube walls with the corresponding loss of luminescent particles dispersed in the methanolic solution.
Luminescence emission of the BMC surface-modified CdSe QDs turned out to be highly sensitive to the presence of cyanide (tetrabutylammonium cyanide salts) in methanol. Fig. 7 a shows the effect of cyanide ions on fluorescence of QDs. As can be seen, the fluorescent emission was progressively quenched by the addition of cyanide. It should be mentioned that at the low cyanide concentration levels (in the order of 10−7 to 10−5 M) investigated in the manuscript, the effect of cyanide ions in the unmodified nanoparticles can be considered negligible.
Cyanide quenched surface-modified QDs were separated by centrifugation, re-dispersed in methanol and their fluorescence measured again. It was observed that the luminescence remained quenched. This result indicates that the quenching anions remained adsorbed or linked to the NPs.
The effect of CN− quencher on the decay time of the QDs fluorescence was also examined. As can be seen in Fig. 7b, fluorescence decay observed for BMC-CdSe in methanol changed with increasing additions of CN−. This result indicates that the observed quenching process seems to be at least partially dynamic. In the absence of cyanide, the emission decay showed in Fig. 7b is dominated by two emission components, with corresponding lifetimes of about 300 and 600 ns, consistent with a photoluminescent model that includes multiple emission pathways. It was observed that only the lifetime values corresponding to the slowest decaying components of the BMC-CdSe QDs decreased significantly with the addition of low concentrations of cyanide.
In a homogeneous medium having only a single-component exponential decay, the quencher concentration could be obtain from the well known Stern–Volmer relationship: I0I=1+Ksv[Q] where I 0 is the intensity of the luminescence phenomena from the luminophor in absence of quencher, and I the intensity of the luminophor when the quencher is present at concentration [Q]. Interestingly, the plots of I 0/I versus cyanide quencher concentration did not fit a conventional linear Stern–Volmer equation. An steep upward curvature was observed (Fig. 8 ). This may indicate that both dynamic and static quenching seem to act together, here suggesting a more complex quenching model . The obtained experimental data for cyanide determination could be fitted, however, to the following empirical equation: lnI0I−1=0.142×107[Q]−2.022 obtaining a good linear relationship (r > 0.998), which could be used to develop a new trace cyanide determination method based on luminescence quenching of QDs.
The limit of detection, calculated following the 3σ IUPAC criteria, was 1.1 × 10−7 M (2.9 μg l−1) of cyanide. It is interesting to note that the sensitivity of the synthesized BMC-CdSe QDs to CN− detection was unaltered after more that 2 months storage of the sensing phase in the dark, at ambient conditions. The precision of the proposed methodology was determined in terms of repeatability (n = 5). R.S.D. values obtained were 2.1% for the determination of a cyanide concentration of 5 × 10−6 M. The quenching by cyanide anions is rather selective: the influence of other anions (including NO3 −, Cl−, SCN−, NO2 −, Br− and I−) on the luminescence emission from the synthesized NPs was then investigated. Results obtained showed that NO3 −, Cl−, SCN− did not exhibit any significant effect on the photoluminescence emission of the QDs, even at concentration levels over 2 × 10−3 M. However, concentrations of I− and NO2 − (over 4 × 10−4 M) or Br− (over 1 × 10−3 M) produced quenching of the luminescence of the QDs. Fig. 8 resumes the quenching effects of the different anions tested on the luminescence of the NPs. As can be seen, the maximum slope was observed for cyanide quenching, thus indicating that at very low concentrations (typically important in environmentally studies) the effect of other studied anions on QDs luminescence is rather low, pointing to a useful system to develop a cyanide optosensing device based on such measurements.
Results found here could also suggest some possible quenching mechanisms of the luminescence of QDs by cyanide: first, the interaction of the cyanide (strong ligand) with the functional groups of the QDs modified surface would bring about a disruption by cyanide of the hydrogen bonds between the BMC groups of the surface-modified CdSe QDs (Fig. 1). This would result in a destabilisation of the QDs in solution, with a modification of their luminescence. Also, as a result of the very high surface-to-volume ratio of these nanoparticles, cyanide adsorption on this high surface could be expected. In fact, it has been recently described that the adsorption of negatively charged cyanide on the surface of films of CdSe quantum dots resulted in an increased electron localization due to compression of the electron wave function in the dots and therefore an increase of the size quantization (size-dependent increase in band gap) of the QDs was observed which could account for the observed quenching of luminescence emission by cyanide.
Studies to obtain functionalised nanoparticles of CdSe semiconductor QDs have been carried out. tert-Butyl-N-(2-mercaptoethyl)-carbamate and CdSe quantum dots have been successfully combined to develop a novel and highly sensitive luminescence nanoprobe for optical recognition of cyanide. Quenching of the luminescence emitted by the synthesized nanoparticles allows the detection of cyanide concentration as low as 1.1 × 10−7 M, thus affording a very sensitive detection system for this toxic chemical species.
The synthesized QDs have shown long emission wavelengths and a high separation between the excitation and emission wavelengths (over 100 nm) simplifying photoluminescent measurements.
A disadvantage of the synthesized QDs, however, is that they were insoluble in water, a clear limitation for environmental applications. However, the possibility of modifying the chemistry of the core–shell system in the QDs, by adding different water soluble organic ligands, is already in progress in our laboratory. In any case, the synthesized surface-functionalized nanoparticles have a considerable potential as optical nanoprobes and are opening new applications via their immobilization in membranes or resin-based solid surfaces. Such optosensing strategies are in progress in our laboratory and could eventually allow the development of highly sensitive and selective optosensors for cyanide traces determinations based either on fluorescence intensity or on lifetime changes induced by the analyte in the surface-modified QDs.