In recent years, the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) has been attracting much attention due to its high energy conversion efficiency and low cost . Many investigations have focused on the following issues: synthesis of dye molecules , theoretical analysis of charge-transport processes , development of quasi-solid state or solid-state electrolytes , fabrication of new style cells , etc. However, only a few studies have been performed on the counter electrode of the DSC .
The counter electrode widely used in DSC is constructed of conducting glass substrates coated with Pt films, where the platinum acts as a catalyst. Although this type of counter electrode has a better performance, it is expensive, because the two conducting glass substrates are estimated to be about 60% of the total cost of the DSC . In addition, glass has shape limitations and is fragile. Therefore, in order to reduce the cost of the DSCs and broaden their applications, such as a flexible film cell, it is necessary to develop novel counter electrodes based on other substrates.
So far, Suzuki et al. and Imoto et al. have used carbon as counter electrodes, and Saito et al. used chemically polymerized poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) on a conductive glass as the counter electrode, and a conductive polymer film (PET) was also used instead of the expensive conductive glass substrate . However, the conversion efficiencies of the DSCs based on these new types of counter electrodes were low.
Metal sheets or foils, e.g., stainless steel, have excellent electrical and thermal conductivities, and are inexpensive. It is expected that the application of a metal substrate as a solar cell electrode can not only reduce the fabrication cost of the cell, but can also contribute to improving the performance of the solar cell by reducing the internal resistance.
On the other hand, plastic substrates have advantages in terms of flexibility, weight, and handling. Recently, there has been an increasing interest in flexible DSCs based on the polymer film instead of FTO glass, and several attempts have been made to manufacture a flexible photoanode by depositing a nanostructured TiO2 layer on a plastic substrate, as mentioned above. However, less attention has been paid to other plastic films as counter electrodes.
We have been performing systematic studies of counter electrodes, including the effect of the Pt film thickness on the performance of the DSCs, and the development of novel substrate materials for the counter electrode .
In this paper, we report the properties of several metal and plastic counter electrodes, such as sheet resistances, stability, and the performance of the fabricated DSCs.
Several metal sheets (stainless steel, SUS304; nickel, aluminum, and copper; Nilaco Co. Ltd.) were used as the counter electrode substrates for the DSCs. A polyester film (OHP, Sakurai Co. Ltd.), polystyrene, polyethylene (PE), and polyethylene naphthalate film coated with tin-doped indium oxide (ITO-PEN, Tobi Co., Ltd.) were also used as the counter electrodes substrates. The corrosion stabilities of the substrates in an electrolyte solution were observed and measured using a polarized Zeeman atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Z-6100, Hitachi). The electrolyte solution was composed of 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M I2, 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium iodine and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in 3-methoxypropionitrile.
Platinized counter electrodes were fabricated using sputtering instruments (TOKUDA, MODEL CFS-4ES-231USC and PMC-5000 Plasma multicoater). For comparison, platinized glass counter electrodes based on a conducting glass (fluorine-doped SnO2 overlayer, FTO, Asahi Glass Co., Ltd.) and a glass slide were also fabricated. Thermal deposition and electrochemical deposition were also used to coat the Pt film on the metal and plastic substrates. A platinum nanoparticle solution was prepared according to the procedure described in a previous paper .
The sheet resistances (R sh) of the substrates and the platinized counter electrodes were measured by the four-dot method (HL5500 PC Hall effect measurement system).
Porous TiO2 photoelectrodes were fabricated using a screen-printing technique on the FTO glass. The TiO2 paste was prepared from TiO2 powder (P25, Nippon Aerosil; ST-01, Ishihara Sangyo Kaisha Ltd.) and polyethylene glycol 600, according to the procedure described in our previous paper . The area and thickness of the TiO2 electrode were 0.2 cm2 and ca. 17 μm. The TiO2 films were immersed in an ethanol solution of cis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II)-bis-tetrabutylammonium (N719 dye, 5 × 10−4 M) for 12 h at 25 °C.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was employed to determine the series resistance of the DSCs. For EIS measurements, a sandwich cell consisting of a TiO2 electrode platinized on an FTO glass sheet and a counter electrode of different substrates, between which a Surlyn film (Dupont, 50 μm) was inserted as a spacer, was used. The electrolyte was composed of 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M I2, 0.6 M 1,2-dimethyl-3- propylimidazolium iodine, and 0.5 M tert-butylpyridine in methoxypropionitrile. EIS spectra were obtained at zero bias potential and 10 mV amplitude over the frequency range of 0.05–105 Hz.
Current–voltage curves of the DSCs were obtained by scanning a bias voltage while measuring the photocurrents under white light irradiation (100 mW/cm2) using a sandwich solar cell constructed of the dye-anchored TiO2 electrode and the platinized counter electrode. A 300 W Xe lamp (Ushio Inc., Japan) served as a light source. The photon flux impinging on the cell was determined by a power meter (Nova, Ophir Optronics Ltd.) and a calibration cell (BS-520, s/n 019, Bunkoh-Keiki Co., Ltd.). The cells were sealed with Amosil 4 (Solaronix SA) and a 50-μm thick polymer film was inserted as a spacer (Mitsuidenpo Co., Ltd.) between the two electrodes. For the cell consisting of the ITO-PEN counter electrode, the cell was sealed by the spacer film. The electrolyte solution was introduced through small holes drilled in the counter electrode.
It is known that the performance of the solar cell is directly influenced by the sheet resistance (R sh), especially for a large unit cell. We measured the sheet resistances of the substrates and the platinized counter electrodes used in this study, and these results are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 . It can be seen that no obvious changes in the R sh of the metal sheet and the three types of ITO-PEN films were observed after sputtering a Pt layer. On the other hand, the R sh for the electrically insulating substrates, e.g., glass sheet and polyester film, were drastically reduced to 39 and 61 Ω/sq after coating with the 50-nm-thick Pt film. For the metal counter electrodes, the sheet resistance is very low, only 1/10,000 or 1/100,000 of those of FTO glass and ITO-PEN substrate sputtered Pt film, as shown in Table 1. A low sheet resistance of the electrode substrate is a key point in improving the performance of the DSCs. A discussion regarding this point is provided in Section 3.4.
An approximately 50 nm thick Pt film was sputtered on the metal sheet under high power (200 mW, 12 min) and a mirror like film was observed. For the plastic substrates, however, cracking or deformation of the substrate occurred under the same conditions. Instead, the Pt film on the plastic substrates was deposited under mild conditions (20 mA, 3 min).
We also attempted two other methods, i.e., thermal deposition and electrodeposition. The thermal deposition procedure was as follows: the platinum nanoparticle solution was coated on the metal sheet by a spin coater, and then sintered to the metal sheet at 385 °C for 15 min. On the contrary, for the ITO-PEN substrates, because the thermal treatment at 250 °C caused a drastic deformation of the substrates before the solution of nanoparticles was evaporated, the Pt films on the plastic substrates were deposited using a plating process and a sputtering method at room temperature. The thicknesses of the Pt-layers deposited by thermal deposition and plating deposition was controlled at ca. 50 nm.
The corrosion stabilities of the metal and plastic substrates in the electrolyte solution were examined. These results are summarized in Table 1. We observed that the Cu and Al foils dissolved in the electrolyte, and the color of the electrolyte changed from brown to colorless. On the other hand, no changes in the color for the stainless steel and Ni sheets were observed. The atomic absorption spectroscopy measurements have verified that the stainless steel and Ni sheet have a good stability in the electrolyte solution for 3 months; the details of this have been described in a previous communication . For the plastic substrates, the polystyrene film dissolved slightly in the electrolyte solution at ambient temperature, whereas no changes for the polyester (OHP) and ITO-PEN film were observed after immersion in the electrolyte solution at 60 °C and at ambient temperature for 3 months. These results indicated that the polyester (OHP) and ITO-PEN films were stable in the electrolyte solution.
We investigated the performances of DSCs based on counter electrodes of various substrates. The characteristics of the DSCs are summarized in Tables 3 and 4 .
The primary conversion efficiency for the DSCs based on the stainless steel and Ni electrodes reached only 4.8% and 4.7%, respectively . After optimization of the thickness of the Pt layer coated on the metal substrates and the sputtering power, the conversion efficiencies were improved to 5.3% and 5.1%, respectively. It should be noted that these overall conversion efficiencies were high when using the P25 photoelectrode and could be almost comparable to that based on the FTO glass counter electrode.
Table 4 shows the performance of DSCs having plastic counter electrodes. The DSC with the ITO-PEN electrode exhibited a relatively higher conversion efficiency (4.2–5.4%). On the other hand, the DSCs based on the polyethylene, polystyrene, and OHP electrodes showed relatively low performances. These results were considered to be due to the higher sheet resistance for these counter electrodes than those of the FTO glass and ITO-PEN electrodes, although the sheet resistances were improved using the coated Pt film. Because the series resistance R s of the cell is considered to consist of the sheet resistance of the electrode substrate (R sh), the resistance of the porous TiO2 electrode and the resistance of the electrolyte , R s therefore directly influences the fill factor of the j–V curve; that is a higher series resistance implies a lower fill factor, as was pointed out by the referee.
In order to compare the R sh of DSCs with different counter electrode substrates, the R sh values were determined by EIS measurements and the results are shown in Fig. 3 . The equivalent circuit for this type of solar cell was described in the literature . For high frequencies around 100 kHz, the impedance is dominated by the serial resistance (R s). The R s values of DSC with different substrates were 18–53 Ω for a 0.20 cm2 active area. The R s values of DSCs with stainless steel, FTO, ITO-PEN, and OHP substrates increase in that order, and the R sh values also increase. For the DSC based on the polyester counter electrode, higher R s and R sh values resulted in a lower fill factor of 49%.
Furthermore, to compare the relation between the electrode R sh and the performance of the DSC, we chose the three types of ITO-PEN films with different R sh value (16, 27, 62 Ω/sq) as the counter electrode substrates. The performance characteristics obtained are shown in Table 4. It was evident that the conversion efficiency decreased with the increase in the electrode R sh; that is, when the R sh of the counter electrode increases by about a factor of 3.9, the fill factor is reduced by ca. 10%, as is the conversion efficiency. Because the j–V characteristics of the DSC can be treated by Eq. (1) as those of a p–n junction solar cell , the relation between the R s and the current density is comprehensible. j=jsc-j0[exp(qV+Rsj/nkT)-1].
Regarding the performance of DSCs with polystyrene and polyethylene substrates, although the R sh is in the same range as that of the ITO-PEN 150, there was no conductive layer on the substrate. Consequently, the current collection may be affected and result in a lower current density. Also, we estimated that the density of Pt coated on these substrates was not higher than that of the ITO-PEN.
Furthermore, to elucidate how the size of the cell influences the performances of the DSCs, we compared the conversion efficiencies of DSCs with four different electrode areas of 0.5, 1.0, 2.2, and 4.0 cm2, which were fabricated with both stainless steel and FTO glass counter electrodes. Fig. 1 shows the relation between them. With the increase in the active area of the DSCs, the conversion efficiencies and fill factors of the cells were decreased. However, the rate of decrease for the metal electrode was not faster than that of the FTO glass electrode, and a cross-over point can be seen at 0.6 cm2, as shown in Fig. 1. This means that use of the stainless steel counter electrode improved the fill factor and conversion efficiency of the DSC by reducing the internal resistance of the large size cell. These results indicated that the reduction of the electrode R sh is very important in improving the performance of the larger size solar cell.
Fig. 2 shows the photocurrent–voltage curves of the DSCs based on the stainless steel counter electrodes coated with a Pt layer using three different methods, that is, sputtering, thermal deposition, and electrodeposition. A relatively higher short circuit current, open circuit voltage, and fill factor for the DSC based on the sputtered Pt counter electrode were obtained. However, for the DSC based on the counter electrode using thermal deposition, the open voltage (V oc) and the fill factor were lower. For the cell fabricated using the electrodeposited counter electrode, only 5.2 mA of photocurrent was obtained. These results indicate that, although the counter electrodes prepared from the nanoparticle colloid have porous surfaces, i.e, have a relative high catalytic activity, the adhesion of the Pt layer with the substrate was not good. For the electrodeposited counter electrode, the porosity rather than the adhesion was not good. As mentioned in our previous paper, the catalytic activity and the adhesion of the Pt layer are very important for the performance of DSCs , therefore, it is considered that these are some reasons for the reduction of the energy conversion efficiency.
The efficiency and stability of the DSCs based on two typical counter electrodes, i.e., the stainless steel sheet and ITO-PEN film, have been studied under continuous illumination by monitoring the j–V characteristics with time. Because we found that the cell fabricated by the P25 photoelectrode and the FTO glass had significant degradation after continuous illumination for 160 h (the details will be reported elsewhere), ST-01 photoelectrodes were used in this study. The stabilities of the DSCs based on the stainless steel and the ITO-PEN counter electrodes were tested over 553 h. The results are shown in Fig. 4 . It can be seen that the open circuit voltage (V oc) was almost unchanged; however, a gradual decrease in the photocurrent and the solar energy conversation efficiency of the DSCs was observed. The overall solar energy conversation efficiency for the stainless steel and ITO-PEN were reduced by 52% and 48%, respectively. On the contrary, a reference cell based on the FTO glass was stable within the same time period. The reduction of conversation efficiency for the stainless steel and ITO-PEN cell were attributed to the difficulty of cell sealing and the coating state of the Pt film as the catalyst. Further studies of cell sealing and Pt coating methods on the metal and plastic substrates are necessary.
We investigated the properties of DSCs based on several metal and plastic counter electrodes. It was clarified that the stainless steel, Ni, and the ITO-PEN film coated Pt layer had good stabilities in the electrolyte solution. High conversion efficiencies of the DSCs fabricated using the metal substrates and the ITO-PEN film as counter electrodes were obtained, which were almost comparable to that of the FTO glass. In addition, the stainless steel counter electrode showed an important advantage, that is, its excellent electric conductivity, which improved the fill factor and conversion efficiency for the large-size DSC due to the reduced internal resistance of the cell. We believe these novel counter electrodes could be very useful for reducing the manufacturing costs of DSCs, enlarging the size of the DSCs, and developing new style flexible DSCs.