Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) are salts with melting points at or close to room temperature. Typically, these salts consist of bulky organic cations, such as N-alkylpyridinium and 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium combined with an inorganic or organic anion. They represent an interesting class of solvents because they exhibit properties such as negligible vapor pressure, good thermal stability, tunable viscosity, and primarily anion-dependent miscibility with water as well as various organic solvents. In recent years, RTILs have been widely considered as alternatives to classical organic solvents and applied in organic synthesis, electrochemistry, liquid-phase extraction, catalysis for clean technology, and separations.
Alkylimidazolium-based ionic liquids have been used as a stable stationary phase for gas chromatography. They show unusual selectivity with “dual nature”, separating polar compounds as if they were polar stationary phases and non-polar compounds as if they were non-polar stationary phases. Ionic liquids have also been used as electrolyte additives in capillary electrophoresis (CE) for the separation of polyphenols, basic proteins, aromatic acids, and anthraquinones. The analytes may associate with either the ionic liquid cations that coat the inner wall of the fused silica capillary or with the free ionic liquid cations in the running electrolyte solution. If covalently bonded to the capillary inner walls, RTILs provide a permanent positive charge, which in turn reverses the electroosmotic flow (EOF) in CE. In high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), RTILs have been used as a mobile phase additive for the separation of ephedrines, catecholamines, amines, and others. It was proposed that the imidazolium cations interact with the silanol groups on the surface of the silica particles, suppressing the adverse effects of free silanols in liquid chromatography. The separation of basic species and polar analytes was improved by providing better peak shape; decreased retention times were also observed. The UV absorbance and relatively high viscosity of RTILs are limitations that prevent their widespread application as mobile phase additives in HPLC.
Very little work has been reported on the use of RTILs as stationary phases for HPLC. Arguably, when ionic liquids are diluted or immobilized on a support, they may not possess all the properties of the neat ionic liquids. Nevertheless, their potential use as stationary phases for HPLC is an intriguing concept and deserves to be explored. Very recently, and during the course of our work, the retention characteristics of a butylimidazolium-based HPLC stationary phase were studied by Stalcup and coworkers using linear solvation free energy relationships. Twenty-eight neutral, small aromatic solutes were used to study the retention properties of the new stationary phase under reversed phase conditions. They found that the 1-butyl-3-heptylimidazolium bromide stationary phase is remarkably similar to conventional phenyl-based stationary phases under reversed phase conditions. It was indicated that this new type of stationary phase shows promise for truly multi-modal retention properties, which may lead to more universally applicable separation media.
In this report, we present initial studies on particulate silica support material modified with two RTILs with potential use as HPLC stationary phases: 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium bromide (MPIM) and 1-n-butyl-3-propylimidazolium bromide (BPIM). First, MPIM and BPIM were synthesized as alkoxysilane derivatives to allow covalent functionalization of the silica particle surface, as outlined in Fig. 1. The modified silica material was then characterized and tested under chromatographic conditions for the separation of small aromatic carboxylic acids.
p-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid (pKa = 4.5 ± 0.2), 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid (pKa = 4.7 ± 0.2), benzoic acid (pKa = 4.2 ± 0.2), and HPLC grade methanol were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The pKa values for the aromatic acids were estimated using Advanced Chemistry Development (ACD/Labs) Software Solaris V4.67 (1994–2005 ACD/Labs). Phosphoric acid was from Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ). The 3 µm Apex silica particles were purchased from Jones Chromatography (Lakewood, CO). 1-Methylimidazole (99%) and 1-butylimidazole (98%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and twice distilled prior to use. (3-Bromopropyl)trimethoxysilane was used as received from Gelest Inc. (Morrisville, PA). Moisture-sensitive reactions were performed in heat gun-dried glassware using standard Schlenk line techniques employing dry argon to provide an inert atmosphere.
1-Alkyl-3-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)imidazolium bromide preparation. A slight molar excess of (3-bromopropyl)trimethoxysilane was added to fresh doubly-distilled 1-alkylimidazole in a clean, dry round bottom flask containing a PTFE-coated magnetic stir bar. After a reaction period of one full week at room temperature, any remaining volatiles were removed by rotary evaporation and the product, obtained as slightly yellow viscous oil, was washed several times with cold diethyl ether followed by drying under reduced pressure and storage over calcium sulfate.
1-Methyl-3-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)imidazolium bromide: 91% yield, 1H NMR [400 MHz, CDCl3, δ (ppm relative to TMS)]: 9.991 (s, 1H), 7.604 (s, 1H), 7.356 (s, 1H), 4.131 (t, 2H, J = 7.2 Hz), 3.921 (s, 2H), 3.338 (s, 9H), 1.795 (m, 2H), 0.418 (t, 2H, J = 8.2 Hz).
1-Butyl-3-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)imidazolium bromide: 96% yield, 1H NMR [400 MHz, CDCl3, δ (ppm relative to TMS)]: 10.378 (s, 1H), 7.588 (m, 1H), 7.450 (m, 1H), 4.318 (m, 4H), 3.503 (s, 9H), 1.960 (m, 2H), 1.859 (m, 2H), 1.314 (m, 2H), 0.898 (t, 3H, J = 7.4 Hz), 0.577 (t, 2H, J = 8.2 Hz).
Preparation of ionic liquid-functionalized silica particles. In order to remove metal ion impurities, 3 µm diameter Apex (Jones Chromatography Ltd., UK) spherical silica particles (0.3 cm3 g−1 pore volume, 100 Å pore diameter) were initially soaked overnight in 30% HCl. The particles were then spun down in a centrifuge at 5000 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant discarded, and the particles resuspended in fresh deionized water. This was repeated no less than 10 times after which the pH of the final rinse was above 5.5. The acid-treated particles were then heated in a convection oven at 70 °C for 3 h to hydroxylate the surface and subsequently dried at 90 °C overnight in a vacuum oven and cooled in a desiccator. Then, 1.20 g of treated and dried silica particles were suspended in 40 mL dry toluene in a clean, dry 125 mL round bottom flask equipped with a reflux condenser and a gas inlet valve. A 4-fold molar excess of the 1-(trimethoxysilylpropyl)-3-alkylimidazolium bromide salt was added while stirring. The molar excess was calculated relative to the number of silanol groups assuming a maximal surface density of 8 µmol m−2 for a particle surface area of 167 m2 g−1, as determined by BET nitrogen gas adsorption analysis. The suspension was kept at room temperature for 1 h and then allowed to proceed under reflux conditions for 18 h. The reflux condenser was held at 65 °C in order to remove the methanol by-product. After cooling, the particles were collected by filtration and exhaustively washed with methanol. The remaining methanol was removed under reduced pressure allowing the particles to dry.
The thermogravimetric analysis was performed using a TGA 7.0 analyzer from Perkin Elmer. All thermogravimetric measurements were performed in a nitrogen atmosphere over the temperature range of 20 to 800 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. BET measurements were performed using ASAP 2000 instrumentation from Micromeritics. NMR experiments were performed using a Bruker 400 MHz NMR spectrometer. The HPLC system consisted of an ISCO DM 100 syringe pump (Teledyne Isco, Lincoln, NE), an injector equipped with a 500 nL sample injection loop (VICI Valco, Houston, TX) and a UV detector (Thermo Spectra 100, Suncol, CA). The RTIL-modified silica particles were packed into a stainless steel column (100 mm × 2.1 mm id) by the conventional slurry packing method using acetone as the solvent. All chromatograms were obtained at room temperature with a flow rate of 200 µL min−1. The model compounds were monitored via UV detection at 214 nm. Data collection was performed using National Instruments Labview 6.1 software running a data collection program readily available (http://www.umich.edu/).
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). 29Si NMR with cross-polarization (CP) and magic-angle spinning (MAS) was performed on the BPIM-modified silica particles to confirm attachment of the RTIL to the silica particle surface. The 29Si CP-MAS NMR spectrum, shown in Fig. 2, shows two prominent features in the region from −50 to −60 ppm, which are attributed to the silanization of the silica particle surface (T units). The two signals in the NMR spectrum at −50 ppm and −57 ppm are ascribed to SiO–SiR–(OMe)2 and (SiO)2–SiR–OMe units, respectively; in our case, the R groups correspond to the RTIL moiety. That is, the organic RTIL is predominantly bonded to the surface via either one or two Si–O–Si bonds, although there is also a small contribution from trifunctional silane (SiO)3–Si–R units containing three Si–O–Si bonds; i.e,, the shoulder appearing at −66 ppm. The relatively large signal at −101 ppm, assigned to (SiO)3–Si–OH groups, suggests the presence of a large amount of unreacted hydroxyl groups and is consistent with the relatively low surface coverage estimated from TGA analysis (see below). In general, it appears that most of the RTIL species incorporated onto the silica particle are attached through the reaction of two of the methoxy groups in the parent trialkoxysilane (i.e., one alkoxy group remains unreacted). The ratio of single attachment on the silica support (i.e., two alkoxy groups remaining in the RTIL silylating agent) to double attachment (i.e., one alkoxy group left) was 1 : 2.2, which corresponds to 29% and 63%, respectively. Thus, the percentage of triple attachment where no alkoxy group remains is only about 8%. Fig. 3 compares the 13C NMR spectrum of the liquid BPIM ionosilane precursor with the solid-state NMR spectrum for BPIM-modified silica particles. The signal assignments were performed by quantum chemical calculations with analogy to the 1-methyl-3-nonylimidazolium (MNIM) cation in the [MNIM]PF6 RTIL. The NMR resonance that is present in the liquid sample at about 80 ppm is attributed to the solvent. The significant line broadening in the lower NMR spectrum, which arises from the anisotropy of the solid-state sample, makes a head-to-head comparison of the two spectra less straightforward. Clearly, however, the silanization reaction significantly impacts only the peak at 5.85 ppm associated with the carbon atom directly attached to the silicon atom in BPIM. The chemical shifts for the remaining carbon atoms in the BPIM-modified silica sample in the solid-state NMR spectrum are hardly changed. The resonance at 5.85 ppm observed in the liquid-state NMR spectrum is absent in the solid-state NMR spectrum of the modified particle and appears to have largely merged with the peak near 10 ppm.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). TGA was performed on the silica particles modified with 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium bromide (MPIM) or with 1-n-butyl-3-propylimidazolium bromide (BPIM), as well as on the unmodified particles in the temperature range of 20 to 800 °C. Based on the thermograms provided in Fig. 4, it can be seen that there is an initial loss of weight at a temperature below 100 °C for all samples. This is attributed to the removal of physically adsorbed water and/or any minor solvent residues remaining from the particle modification procedures. Physically adsorbed water is removed completely by further heating to about 200 °C. Inspection of the TGA trace for the unmodified silica reveals a small, but noticeable, thermal event in the region from 250 to 600 °C. This can be attributed to dehydroxylation of the silica surface, in which silanol groups condense to siloxanes, a process known to occur in this thermal region. The modified particles, on the other hand, showed two very distinct thermal events, one occurring in the range of 250–400 °C and the other in the range of 400–600 °C. The first of these two regions is where the organic moieties at the surface are expected to thermally decompose. The second one is associated with decomposition of the residual methoxy side groups.
The weight loss of the RTIL-modified particles beyond 200 °C was compared to that of the unmodified bare silica particles and the results collected in Table 1. The dehydroxylation process on the silica surface accounts for 1.4% weight loss. The particles derivatized with MPIM and BPIM each had a total weight loss of about 7%. Using the RTIL precursor molecular weights, the weight percent loss by TGA, and the surface area for the parent silica, one can estimate the surface coverage of the RTIL-modified silica; i.e., surface coverage is equal to the total weight loss divided by the molecular weight of the phase and the surface area. The specific surface area of the silica particles, as determined by nitrogen gas adsorption BET analysis was 166.9 m2 g−1. Taking into account the modes of attachment onto the silica (see above), the phase coverage was estimated to be 0.84 µmol m−2 for both MPIM and BPIM stationary phases.
The MPIM- and BPIM-modified silica particles were packed into stainless steel columns and tested under reversed phase HPLC conditions. Our first investigations were performed with the MPIM-modified particles. Fig. 5 shows a separation of aromatic carboxylic acids with the MPIM stationary phase using 5 mM phosphate at pH 4.2 as the mobile phase. The retention factors of the acidic compounds in the sample mixture (equimolar p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid, and benzoic acid) increased with decreasing pKa values. At pH 4, the acids are partially dissociated. Therefore, hydrophobic interactions and ion-exchange were the major factors expected to be contributing to the retention. It appears that an ion-exchange mechanism predominates in the separation since 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid, the compound with a stronger hydrophobic character, is less retained than p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid. There is, however, the potential for multiple interactions as discussed below.
Effect of the mobile phase. An investigation into the effects of the pH on retention factors was performed to determine the extent of ionic interactions with the RTIL stationary phase. Using a mobile phase containing phosphate buffer, we monitored the retention factor of the organic acids as a function of the mobile phase pH. Table 2 lists the retention factors of the three organic acids at various mobile phase pH values. The total ionic strength of the mobile phase was maintained at 5–6 mM. In anion exchange chromatography, it is typical to observe an increase in the retention of an acidic compound as the pH of the mobile phase is increased. In our experiments, however, the retention factors for all of the acidic test solutes actually decreased with an increase in pH from 4.2 to 6.4, suggesting that there are other key interactions taking place besides anion-exchange; these could be hydrophobic and/or electrostatic in nature.
Above pH 3, the silanol groups on the silica surface will become ionized but complete dissociation of the surface silanols is not expected until the pH is above 7. The ionized silanol groups may affect the separation either by delocalizing the positive charge on the MPIM stationary phase by electrostatic interactions or by repelling negatively-charged analyte species by direct electrostatic interaction. Fig. 6 depicts a scenario for potential RTIL conformation on the silica surface that is consistent with our 29Si NMR results. The two effects can contribute to the observed minimal ion exchange interactions at pH 6.4. The acids were observed to elute in the order of increasing hydrophobic interaction, which indicates that hydrophobic, rather than ion exchange interactions are stronger in this case. As the pH is decreased the silanols become protonated and the two proposed effects caused by the silanols should diminish. Decreasing the pH to 5.2 resulted in an increased retention, maintaining the same elution order. As the pH was reduced further to 4.2, the elution order of p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid and 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid was inverted while benzoic acid remained the most retained compound. At this pH, the elution order corresponded to a decrease in pKa, indicating a strong dependence on the ionic character of the test solute. By decreasing the pH to 3, the retention factors decreased considerably. At pH 3.2, the ionization of silanol groups is very limited, and the cationic moiety of the ionic liquid phase would be expected to have much less interaction with the silanols. At the same time, however, the tests solutes are much less ionized, with the neutral form of all analyte species predominating. Under such conditions, the ionic interactions with the cationic moiety of the stationary phase are reduced, and hence so is retention. At pH = 3.2, the retention of the test solutes appeared to be influenced by hydrophilic/hydrophobic interactions.
In general, for the solutes tested and at a mobile phase pH above the solutes' pKa values, one would expect strong ionic exchange interactions with the imidazolium moiety of the RTIL. It is also likely, however, to have interactions between the imidazolium group and the silica silanol groups. This would lead to the observed diminished ionic interactions of the test solute with the stationary phase. At a pH below the solute's pKa, the ionization of the silanols is suppressed; however, the ionization of the test compounds is also suppressed, minimizing ionic interactions. It is at a pH closer to the pKa of the test solutes that all the contributors to retention are maximized, with an apparent major contribution from the ionic interactions. Varying ionic strength slightly and the amount of organic modifier in the mobile phase did not show much influence on the retention factors of these acidic analytes.
1-n-Butyl-3-propylimidazolium stationary phase. The BPIM stationary phase was tested under the same conditions as for the MPIM-based stationary phase. The most significant difference was that the test compounds were retained slightly longer, which was expected due to the longer hydrocarbon chain contributing to hydrophobic interactions; the resolution of the test compounds, however, did not improve. At pH 4, the separation of 3-(p-hydroxyphenyl)propionic acid and p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid on the BPIM stationary phase was less efficient than with the MPIM phase as shown in Fig. 7. As discussed previously, the influence on the elution order of the acids from ion exchange interactions is predominating at a pH close to the pKa of the test solutes. In the case where the BPIM was used, the contribution to retention due to hydrophobic interactions is contrary to that of the ion exchange mechanism and therefore has a negative impact on the entire separation as compared to the shorter-chained MPIM phase. Consequently, the worst separation with the BPIM stationary phase was observed near pH 4. These results further corroborate the idea that the acids were separated with the MPIM and BPIM stationary phases under multiple interactions.
In summary, two imidazolium RTIL ionosilane derivatives were synthesized and bonded to silica particles for use in HPLC. NMR and TGA analyses corroborated the successful attachment of the derivatives to the silica particles. The attachment protocol rendered modified particles with a relatively low surface coverage (i.e., ∼0.8 µmol m−2) and efforts are currently dedicated to improving the surface coverage. Nevertheless, the modified particles were suitable to study the initial characteristics of this novel type of stationary phase. Obviously, more in-depth studies are required to fully understand the mechanism of retention of these stationary phases and the effects of using different alkyl-chains or functional units on the imidazolium cation (or other cation types) as well as the counter ion. These initial efforts demonstrate the feasibility of preparing and bonding the RTIL on the silica surface, adding to the use of RTIL in analytical chemistry. As also pointed out by Stalcup and coworkers, immobilized RTILs may bring forth new types of HPLC stationary phases with mixed-mode selectivities; the preparation and particularly the study of these phases for HPLC, however, can be considered to be in its infancy.