Inorganic modified electrodes are widely used in many areas, such as electroanalysis and site-selective electrocatalysis , electrochromic devices , electrochemical power sources and materials science , photocurrent response studies , protection against corrosion , and interfacial charge and electron transfer , etc. Since the pioneering work of Neff and Itaya et al. on Prussian blue modified electrodes, various inorganic materials such as clays , zeolites , transition metal oxides , metal phthalocyanines , metal porphyrins , transition metal particles , polyoxo-metallate and polynuclear transition metal cyanides have been used to fabricate inorganic film modified electrodes. Of these, the transition metal hexacyanoferrate has received much attention. Considering the wide scope of electrochemical studies and their possible exploitation, attention is currently being paid to the preparation of a number of analogues of Prussian blue as revealed by the growing number of references on this subject . On careful examination of different reports on metal hexacyanoferrate-modified electrodes and their redox characteristics published so far, it is apparent that only a few have been found to be as successful as Prussian blue from the viewpoint of the varied applications listed above, perhaps due to the absence of the characteristics and reversible redox centres referred to in the case of Prussian blue. Among the many metal hexacyanoferrates, cobalt hexacyanoferrate (CoHCF) is exceptional; it exhibits excellent reversible redox centres very similar to those of Prussian blue.
Electrodes modified with CoHCF have been prepared recently where two different types of film were reported . One type has a redox couple and the other has two redox couples . Studies concerning the structural aspects of CoHCF and its magnetic properties were recently reported by Kulesza et al. and Sato et al. , respectively. Using voltammetry, the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) technique and X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) experiments, Kulesza et al. indicated that CoHCF has a rigid, cubic-type, zeolite structure composed of three orthogonal FeCNCo chains in which both metals (Fe and Co) are octahedrally coordinated by six carbons and six nitrogens. The chemical environment of Co(II) in CoHCF, particularly the CoN bond lengths, is dependent on the nature and size of the alkali metal countercations, accommodated in the CoHCF structure. Sato et al. demonstrated that the cobalt iron cyanide thin film (about 0.5–0.1 μm thick), which was synthesized electrochemically on a platinum electrode under potentiostatic conditions at −0.4 V (vs. SCE) in aqueous solution, behaves as if it contained molecular magnets that exhibit long-time magnetic ordering or bistability with hysteresis. But the application of CoHCF modified electrodes has not been exploited very much. Green-Pedersen and Korshin studied the possibility of using the CoHCF modified graphic electrode to separate and transfer Cs+ from high sodium waters. Their results indicated that a thin layer of CoHCF was highly selective to Cs+ in the presence of overwhelmingly higher concentrations of Na+ and K+. Cs+ was incorporated into the electrode at 0 V and expelled at +1.0 V. Only a few papers have reported electrocatalytic reactions at the CoHCF film modified electrode; for example, we have reported the electrocatalytic activity of a CoHCF modified glassy carbon electrode toward NADH oxidation and other authors have reported electrocatalytic oxidation of hydroxylamine, nitrite, thiosulfate, hydrazine and p-chlorophenol at CoHCF modified electrodes . This paper reports the electrocatalytic oxidation of ascorbic acid, a typical example of an electrocatalytic reaction, at a CoHCF modified glassy carbon (CoHCF/GC) electrode, and the kinetic processes of the electrocatalytic reaction are explained.
l-Ascorbic acid (H2A) was purchased from Shanghai Lizhu Dongfeng Biotechnology (Shanghai, PR China) and was used as received without further purification. All other chemicals were of analytical grade. Solutions of H2A of the desired concentration were prepared daily. All solutions were prepared with doubly deionized water and deaerated by passing them through high purity nitrogen for 20 min before the electrochemical experiments, and a continuous flow of nitrogen was maintained over the sample solution during experiments.
The electrochemical experiments were carried out with an EG&G PAR 273 potentiostat/galvanostat using M270 electrochemical analysis software in a three-electrode cell configuration comprising a PTFE-shrouded glassy carbon (GC) electrode (3 mm in diameter) as the working electrode, a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as a reference electrode and a coiled platinum wire as the counter electrode. Rotating disk electrode measurements were carried out with a EG&G PAR M616 disk electrode system using a GC disk electrode (4 mm in diameter). The working electrode was polished with metallographic abrasive paper (no. 6, Shanghai, China) first, then with progressively finer slurries of 1, 0.3, and 0.05 μm alumina powder to a mirror finish. After thorough rinsing, the electrode was cleaned in an ultrasonic cleaner for about 15 min, first with ethanol and finally with distilled water, to eliminate any trace of alumina.
The experimental temperature was controlled to 25±0.1°C with a Type 501 thermostat (Shanghai, China)
The CoHCF film was formed electrochemically on the surface of the GC electrode in a manner similar to that previously described . The GC electrode was scanned from −0.5 to −1.15 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 mol dm−3 KNO3 solution containing 1.0×10−3 mol dm−3 Co(NO3)2, and kept at a potential of −1.15 V for a certain period of time for the deposition of cobalt. After removal from the solution and thorough rinsing with water, the electrode was dipped into a 0.2 mol dm−3 NaOAc+HOAc buffer solution (pH 4.7) containing 2.0×10−3 mol dm−3 K3Fe(CN)6, and scanned from −0.8 to +0.4 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Finally, the electrode was rinsed thoroughly with water, and transferred into the phosphate buffer solution to characterise its electrochemical behaviour and examine the electrocatalytic activity toward oxidation of H2A.
The electrochemical responses of the CoHCF/GC electrode (see Fig. 1 ), which was formed as above, were those anticipated for a surface-confined redox couple, because the peak currents were directly proportional to the scan rates. The surface coverage of CoHCF is dependent on the deposition time and can be controlled. Surface coverage, Γ, can be calculated with the equation: Γ=Q/nFA where Q is the charge consumed, obtained from integrating the peak area in cyclic voltammograms under the background correction, n is the number of electrons consumed in the unit electrode reaction (n=1 in the present case) and the other symbols have their usual meaning. Although the surface of the glassy carbon electrode is microscopically rough, it is difficult to estimate the roughness factors, so in all calculations, we have employed the geometric area. Thus, the values reported represent upper limits. In order to maintain constant coverage of CoHCF throughout the experiments, the typical deposition time is 45 s. This deposition time is responsible for a typical value of 8.6×10−8 mol cm−2 for Γ (obtained at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1). Modification of the electrodes was carried out by employing identical solution compositions for obtaining reproducible results.
Fig. 1 shows the cyclic voltammograms of a CoHCF/GC electrode at various scan rates in a 0.025 mol dm−3 phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.0) containing 0.1 mol dm−3 KNO3 as supporting electrolyte in the absence of any electroactive material in solution. An important feature of the cyclic voltammetric responses of CoHCF/GC electrode is that the system undergoes double reduction and double oxidation at low scan rate (<20 mV s−1, Fig. 1, curves a–c). The formal potential, E°′, which was taken as the midpoint of the anodic and cathodic peak potential, is 480 and 645 mV for redox couples I and II, respectively, at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Increasing the scan rate, the values of E°′ for couples I and II shift to the positive and negative direction, respectively; for example, these values changed to 490 and 637.5 mV for couples I and II, respectively, at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The peak-to-peak potential separation was small, although not zero. The deviation of the experimental peak separation from the theoretical value probably arises from: (i) chemical interaction between the ions and the modified film; (ii) electrostatic factors; (iii) polarizabilities of the cation influencing its penetration in and out of the CoHCF film; and (iv) non-equivalent sites in the CoHCF film. However, at high scan rates (≥50 mV s−1), the two anodic peaks merged into one (Fig. 1, curves d–f). The two redox couples occurring at low scan rate can be explained, as proposed by Kulesza and coworkers , by assuming the existence of two possible stoichiometries of CoHCF, namely K2CoIIFeII(CN)6 and KCo1.5 IIFeII(CN)6. Such a system was postulated to be formed during formation of CoHCF films. The following redox reaction are expected: Co1.5IIFeIII(CN)6+e−+K+=KCo1.5IIFeII(CN)6 KCoIIFeIII(CN)6+e−+K+=K2CoIIFeII(CN)6 The film is doped with alkali-metal ions to provide charge neutrality within the film and a net diffusion of ions in and out of the film takes place when the redox state of the film is changed. The insertion of a countercation into the film during reduction and its exclusion upon oxidation, was verified by Kulesza and coworkers using the EQCM method in the case of CoHCF and nickel hexacyanoferrate . It is likely that the KCo1.5 IIFeII(CN)6 form, which is less strongly paired with potassium cations, is responsible for the appearance of a set of peaks at less positive potentials.
The effect of solution pH on the electrochemical behaviour of the CoHCF/GC electrode was investigated by cyclic voltammetry in 0.025 mol dm−3 phosphate buffer solution at various pH values containing 0.1 mol dm−3 KNO3 as supporting electrolyte. The cyclic voltammetric results (not shown here) indicated that the electrochemical responses of the CoHCF/GC electrode were not affected by the solution pH in the pH range 4–10. The peak potentials and heights remained unchanged. The E°′ for CoHCF film was independent of the solution pH in the range 4–10.
The stability of the CoHCF/GC electrode was examined by repetitive scans at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. In the first few scans, the peak currents decreased on continuous scanning and the peak currents remained at 95% of the value of the first cycle after 5 min repetitive scanning (about 13 cycles). The currents remained at 90% of that for the first cycle after 50 min continuous scanning (about 125 cycles), then, almost no changes in height and separation of cyclic voltammetric peaks were observed after 110 min repetitive scans (about 275 cycles). In addition, the CoHCF/GC electrode can withstand being exposed in air or being stored in solution for a period of time (at least one week) and the peak height and the separation of the peak potentials remain unchanged.
The voltammetric responses of a CoHCF/GC electrode were also affected by the concentrations of supporting electrolyte. Fig. 2 shows the cyclic voltammograms of a CoHCF/GC electrode in three different concentrations of KNO3 (pH 7.0). With a decrease of the concentration of electrolyte, the redox peak potentials shifted in the negative direction. The dependence of the peak potential (E p), the separation of the peaks potential (ΔE p) and the formal potential (E°′) on the concentration of supporting electrolyte are shown in Table 1 .
Fig. 3 shows the effects of alkali metal cations on the voltammetric behaviour of a CoHCF/GC electrode. From the cyclic voltammograms, one can find that the CoHCF/GC electrode showed well-defined redox peaks in K+-containing supporting electrolyte solution. In Na+-containing supporting electrolyte, only one pair of broad redox peaks was observed, the peak currents decreased drastically, and in Li+-containing supporting electrolyte, no obvious redox peak can be observed. It is already known that metallocyanate films exhibit electrolyte cation-dependent voltammetric shapes. In studies of the electrochemistry of Prussian blue with various electrolyte cations, Lundgren and Murray also observed different voltammetric behaviour of Prussian blue in XCl (X=Li+, Na+, K+, …) electrolyte. The Prussian blue exhibited a pair of very sharp redox peaks in the case of the K+ electrolyte; the redox peaks became somewhat broad in the Na+ electrolyte. But in the case of Li+ electrolyte, almost no redox peaks were observed at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1; only at the very low scan rate (2 mV s−1), could an unstable voltammetric wave be observed in the first cycle. The dependence of CoHCF voltammetric behaviour on the countercation in the present case is similar to that observed by Lundgren and Murray in the case of Prussian blue.
An explanation of the dependence of the system's behaviour on alkali-metal cations can be attempted by considering the size of a hydrated countercation. CoHCF film has a face-centred cubic lattice crystal structure, Co(II) and Fe(II) or Fe(III), bridged by a CN− group, appearing alternatively at the sites of small cubes . Owing to the rigidity of the crystal lattice of the CoHCF film, the diffusion of cobalt ions in it, is very difficult. Only counterions, such as K+, etc., are transported through the CoHCF film during the electrochemical redox process in order to maintain electroneutrality. It is likely that alkali metal countercations do not retain a complete hydration shell upon entrance to the crystal lattice because the cavity radius for CoCHF is 0.18 nm , the diameters for hydrated cations of Li+, Na+ and K+ are 0.42, 0.36 and 0.24 nm, respectively. The countercations must undergo a partial dehydration in order for them to be of the appropriate size to enter the crystal lattice. The partial dehydration of countercations upon entrance to the crystal lattice was demonstrated by the EQCM data of Kulesza et al. . The extent of dehydration for a given cation is determined by its hydration energy. The higher the hydration energy means the more difficult is the dehydration. The hydration energy in volts, calculated from Gibbs energy of hydration values, for Li+, Na+ and K+ is 5.07, 4.08 and 3.34, respectively . From the value of the hydration energy, one can conclude that the hydrated Li+ undergoes the smallest extent of dehydration among the above three cations. The CoHCF may not be capable of incorporating well the fairly large hydrated Li+ cations, and the film is likely to undergo a structural reorganization to form the non-electroactive counterion-free Co2 IIFeII(CN)6 or its solid solution. The CoHCF film seems to possess greater selectivity for the K+ ion as a counterion. The electrochemical behaviour of CoHCF film was also investigated in ammonium nitrate or rubidium nitrate. The surface activity (height of voltammetric peaks) was lost after the electrode was cycled in NH4NO3 or RbNO3 for a few cycles (typically 2–3 cycles). The electrode failed to regain its activity in KNO3 solution after cycling in NH4NO3 or RbNO3 because of the solubility of the ammonium- or rubidium-substituted cobalt analogue. Similar results were also observed by Joseph and coworkers .
To test the electrocatalytic activity of the CoHCF/GC electrode toward H2A oxidation, cyclic voltammetric responses were obtained in pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution containing 0.1 mol dm−3 KNO3 as supporting electrolyte in the absence and presence of H2A. The results are presented in Fig. 4 . In the absence of H2A (curve a), a pair of well-defined redox peaks for the CoHCF on the electrode surface can be observed. On addition of 5.0×10−4 mol dm−3 H2A, there was a drastic enhancement of the anodic current, and simultaneously, the cathodic current decreased greatly (curve b). This behaviour is consistent with a very strong electrocatalytic effect.
The cyclic voltammograms of CoHCF/GC electrode at various scan rates obtained in buffer solution (pH 7.0) containing 5.0×10−4 mol dm−3 H2A indicate that the anodic peak potential for H2A oxidation shifts slightly in the positive direction with increasing scan rate. The shift of anodic peak potential suggests the existence of a kinetic limitation in the reaction between the CoHCF and H2A. The effects of scan rates on the anodic current for electrocatalytic oxidation of H2A are summarized in Table 2 . In the scan-rate range 10–500 mV s−1, the current function I pa v −1/2 is nearly independent of scan rate, v, changing by about 13%, which indicates that the current is limited mostly by the diffusion of H2A to the electrode surface.
Table 3 shows the effects of the surface coverage, Γ, of CoHCF on the GC electrode surface, on the anodic peak current, I pa, for electrocatalytic oxidation of H2A. Here, Γ has been determined using the method described in Eq. (1). This value is a measure of the number of catalytic centres on the GC electrode surface and thus of the thickness of the CoHCF film. A value of (6.0–9.8)×10−8 mol cm−2 appears to be optimal for electrocatalysis. Markedly thinner or thicker films yield lower anodic peak currents for electrocatalytic oxidation of H2A. The thinner films probably do not offer enough catalytic sites to handle the available supply of H2A, while the thicker ones seem to suffer from a resistive barrier to the delivery of electrons to the catalytic sites. Based on these results and to ensure that the electrocatalytic current for H2A oxidation at a CoHCF/GC electrode was independent of Γ, a deposition time of 45 s, which corresponded to Γ of 8.6×10−8 mol cm−2, was employed in the experiments.
The stability of electrocatalytic activity of the CoHCF/GC electrode toward H2A oxidation was tested by repetitive scanning of the electrode in buffer solution (pH 7.0) containing 5.0×10−4 mol dm−3 H2A. At initial cycles (about five cycles), the electrocatalytic currents decrease quickly with increasing scanning number, then the currents change slowly. After about eight cycles, the electrocatalytic currents reach a relatively stable value, remain ca. 80% of the first cycle, and then no visible changes can be detected. Further experimental results indicated that the stability of the CoHCF/GC electrode for electrocatalytic oxidation of H2A can be improved but the anodic peak height decreases remarkably when the CoHCF/GC electrode is conditioned at a potential of 0 V or a more negative potential for 30 s.
We have carried out rotating disk electrode experiments, by sweeping the potential of the CoHCF/GC electrode at 2 mV s−1 in 0.025 mol dm−3 phosphate buffer solution containing 0.1 mol dm−3 KNO3 as supporting electrolyte in the presence of H2A, to obtain the kinetic parameters for the electrooxidation of H2A. For a given rotational speed, the electrocatalytic current has a linear relationship to the concentration of H2A in the concentration range 5.0×10−5–12×10−2 mol dm−3. For the given concentration of H2A (5.0×10−4 mol dm−3), plots of electrocatalytic currents, I lim, versus ω 1/2 were found to be non-linear, which suggests that the reaction is limited by kinetics and not by transport. The electrocatalytic currents of H2A increase linearly with increasing rotational speed at low rotation rates and the limiting electrocatalytic current approaches independence of the rotation rate as it is increased. The shape of the curve for electrocatalytic current versus ω 1/2, points to an electrocatalytic reaction scheme for H2A oxidation on the CoHCF/GC electrode, similar to that depicted by Oyama and Anson in the case of the oxidation of Fe2+ catalysed by IrCl6 2− incorporated in a protonated PVP coating on the electrode surface. At low rotation rates, the transfer of H2A through the rather thick Levich layer controls the current so that linear I lim versus ω 1/2 behaviour results. At higher values of ω, the thickness of the Levich layer decreases and the magnitude of the current is controlled by the rate of the redox reaction between H2A and the CoHCF film. The situation is analogous to that encountered when a homogeneous redox reaction between an electrogenerated reagent and an electroinactive substrate controls the current at a rotating disk electrode. Such cases are conveniently analysed by means of plots of I lim −1 versus ω −1/2 . Fig. 5 presents examples of the plots.
The linearity of the plots in Fig. 5 indicates that the system follows the equation : Ilim−1=Ilev−1+Ikin−1 where I lim is the measured limited electrocatalytic current and I lev, given by the expression, Ilev=0.62nFAD2/3ω1/2ν−1/6c* is the Levich current representing the mass transport of H2A in the solution and I kin, the kinetic current corresponding to the electron cross-exchange between H2A and the CoHCF redox site, is given by the equation Ikin=nFAkΓc* for reactions that are first-order with respect to both the bulk concentration of H2A, c*, and the surface concentrations of CoHCF on the GC electrode surface, Γ (Γ=8.6×10−8 mol cm−2 in our rotating disk electrode experiments). k is the rate constant governing the electrocatalytic reaction between H2A and CoHCF, D is the diffusion coefficient of H2A in solution. A value of 5.7×10−6 cm2 s−1 for D is adopted in the presence case, as determined using chronoamperometry and rotation disk electrode measurements, and all other parameters have their usual meaning. Both the slopes and intercepts of the lines in Fig. 5 are inversely proportional to bulk concentrations of H2A in accord with Eqs. (4)–(6), suggesting the currents are controlled by the rate of a catalytic redox reaction between CoHCF and H2A . This would not be true if the electron transfer reaction between the GC electrode surface and the CoHCF controlled the current. Plots with a common intercept would result in this case because the second term on the right hand side of Eq. (4) would be independent of the bulk concentration of H2A. The average value of kΓ calculated from the intercepts of the plots is 1.89×10−2 cm s−1 corresponding to a moderate intrinsic rate of heterogenous charge transfer.
The cyclic voltammograms of the CoHCF modified glassy carbon (CoHCF/GC) electrode show the presence of two pairs of well-defined redox peaks at low scan rate while the two anodic peaks merge to one at high scan rates. The voltammetric responses of the CoHCF/GC electrode were affected by the concentration of supporting electrolyte and the counter cations. The CoHCF/GC shows high electrocatalytic activity toward ascorbic acid oxidation. The electrocatalytic reaction rate constant between H2A and CoHCF was determined using rotating disk electrode measurements.