Vegetable materials are often used as bio-indicators for establishing the degree of pollution related to chemicals in the environment. Analysis for the content of bio and toxic elements is also carried out to diagnose abnormal plant development .
In analytical procedures involving elimination of the organic matrix, the chemical sample pre-treatment is frequently considered the ‘Achilles heel’ of the analytical process , mainly due to time consumption.
For the preparation of vegetable samples, dry ashing or wet digestion methods are commonly used . In general, classical wet-digestion procedures (in open systems) entail tedious and laborious steps, and possible analyte losses and/or sample contamination . In addition, dry ashing methods are sometimes discouraged due to possible losses of volatile elements, analyte reactions with the crucible material, difficulties involving dissolution of the combustion residue, and problems such as sample contamination .
In view of these problems, some other procedures for vegetable sample preparation have been proposed . Procedures involving microwave ovens are often employed for sample digestion . Although microwave ovens are an excellent alternative for sample preparation, this equipment is often quite expensive and is limited for routine applications .
Ultrasound can be considered another alternative for solid sample pre-treatment because, this energy facilitates and accelerates some steps, such as dissolution, fusion and leaching, among others . Ultrasonic effects have been exploited for sample preparation in agricultural, biological and environmental applications .
The chemical effects of ultrasound have been attributed to cavitation, generating local high temperatures and to mechanical action between solid and liquid interfaces . In this way, the efficiency of analyte extraction depends on the variables that influence the cavitation process (temperature, viscosity, presence of solid particles, height of water column, frequency, and position of the vessels used for extraction, among others) . However, as long as experimental conditions are constant, the ultrasonic device is an excellent way to perform solid–liquid extraction .
The aim of this work was to improve sample preparation performance, proposing the development of an ultrasound-assisted method for fast and reproducible acid extraction of some macro- and micronutrients in vegetable samples and their determination by FAAS.
A Neytech model 28H ultrasonic bath (USA) at a frequency of 47±3 kHz was used. A peristaltic pump (Ismatec IPC, Glattburg, Switzerland) was used to change the water during sonication. A Marconi model MA 4025 heating block (Piracicaba, SP, Brazil) was employed for wet digestion.
For determination of Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn and Zn, a Perkin-Elmer model AAnalyst 300, flame atomic absorption spectrometer, equipped with a deuterium lamp background-correction system (Norwalk, CT, USA) was used throughout this work. Hollow cathode lamps (Perkin-Elmer, Norwalk, CT, USA) of the different metals were used as the radiation sources and the analytical measurements were based on time-averaged absorbances. The FAAS operating conditions are summarised in Table 1 .
All solutions were prepared with analytical reagent-grade chemicals (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and de-ionised water was used throughout.
Working standard solutions of Ca (1.0–4.0 mg l−1) [from CaCO3], Mg (0.2–0.5 mg l−1), Zn (0.25–1.00 mg l−1), Mn (0.5–2.5 mg l−1) and Fe (1.0–6.0 mg l−1) [in their metallic forms] were prepared by sequential dilutions from stock solutions of 100 mg l−1. For Ca and Mg standard solutions, LaCl3 was used as a concomitant suppresser at a final concentration of 1% w/v.
Two different vegetable materials were used for optimisation of extraction conditions: lettuce and cabbage leaves collected from kitchen gardens in the Campinas neighbourhood. Due to the importance of the method for metal extraction, a medicinal plant (Equisetum pyramidale) was also employed. The accuracy was assessed using all kinds of samples. The samples were cleaned with de-ionised water and dried to constant mass in an oven at 60±5°C. After drying, the samples were ground in a food processor and sieved to a 150–63 μm particle size range.
Accuracy was also evaluated using two reference materials: apple leaves (NIST SRM 1515) and spinach (NIST SRM 1570a). These reference materials were prepared according to the instructions provided on the information sheet.
To improve the sonochemical effects, a study was carried out with the ultrasonic bath. The iodine method was used, with the I2 formed measured at 352 nm with a spectrophotometer. The I2 was formed from KI solution by a radicalar reaction and redox reaction with the H2O2 formed in water sonication. The highest amount of I2 formed reflects the highest cavitation process .
The parameters optimised were water volume (1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 l) and temperature (25, 30 and 35°C); detergent concentration (0, 0.2 and 0.4% w/v); and horizontal (nine tubes positioned equidistant in the bath) and vertical (0, 1.0 and 2.0 cm from the bottom of the bath) positions of the tube in the bath. After optimisation, the best conditions for cavitation were used in the extraction method.
The extraction of Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn and Zn from lettuce and cabbage leaves was performed in the ultrasonic bath. For acid-extraction optimisation, different nitric acid concentrations (0, 0.14 and 1.4 mol l−1) and sonication times (0, 10, 20 and 30 min) were tested. A study related to particle size was also performed, using only the cabbage samples, by varying the particles from 63 to 150 μm. To evaluate the efficiency of the process, the results obtained with the extraction method were compared with those from wet digestion.
An accurately weighed sample of 0.3 g ±0.1 mg was transferred to each digestion tube for ultrasound extraction, 15 ml of the extractor was added and the tubes were placed in the Neytech ultrasonic bath. After sonication, the samples were filtered; the liquid phase was collected in polyethylene flasks for measurement, which was performed by FAAS. The measurements were performed only in the liquid phase in order to avoid possible blockage in the capillary of the FAAS equipment.
To evaluate the fast extraction method, the results obtained with this method were compared with those for wet digestion using HNO3 and H2O2 as the digestion mixture.
The best conditions for the cavitation process were obtained through the iodine method (as already commented in Section 2.4.1). Using the optimised conditions shown in Table 2 , a better cavitation process was achieved.
The water volume is one of principal factors for obtaining good results in ultrasonic applications. Thus, a volume of 1000 ml was used because it produces good performance in the extraction procedures. Using other volumes gave worse results for the iodine method.
It is interesting to note that better cavitation effects were observed when only one tube was sonicated, producing higher absorbances from the KI reaction. In this sense, the central position with the tube positioned 0 cm from the bottom of bath was determined as the best position for a higher cavitation process.
The temperature was chosen because it was possible to work in the environmental temperature, and higher temperatures did not improve the cavitation process.
Concentrations of detergent higher than 0.2% (w/v) were not used, due to an increase in solid particles in the liquid phase of the ultrasonic bath, which diminished the ultrasound propagation. The 0.2% concentration gave the best conditions for cavitation.
In order to select the optimum conditions for extraction, two different vegetables were studied: lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and cabbage (Brassica oleracea capitata). The Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn and Zn extractions were evaluated by varying the acid concentration and the sonication time.
The extraction of the elements studied was checked by comparing the proposed fast extraction method with the wet digestion method .
The results obtained in the optimisation are shown in Fig. 1 . Both parameters studied (acid concentration and sonication time) have an influence on the extraction efficiency, although the effect of acid concentration is more pronounced. These results are similar to those obtained for Pb extraction in different samples using an ultrasonic probe and bath . Fig. 1 shows that incomplete extraction occurs when only water is used, indicating the necessity of acid as an extractor for Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn and Zn. However, the extractions are quite similar when the acid concentration was varied from 0.14 to 1.4 mol l−1, since only slight variations (ca. 3%) were obtained for all the elements studied.
Sonication improved the extraction process. Quantitative extractions were obtained after 10 or 20 min of sonication time and were dependent on the metal studied. When a time of 30 min was used, lower extractions were obtained (Fig. 1). As different species can be formed during sonication, it is possible that a longer sonication time provokes the re-combination of different structures in the liquid, forming new species and reducing ions in the liquid phase .
Using 0.14 mol l−1 nitric acid and 10 min for the sonication time, better conditions for extraction were achieved for the elements studied, except for iron in lettuce, which produced lower recoveries compared to those with wet digestion. This may be due to depression of the Fe response in the presence of organic acids . The use of 1.4 mol l−1 HNO3 results in better recoveries for iron. This can be explained by the higher concentration of HNO3 used. Sometimes the use of an acid mixture or of oxidising agents is an effective way for obtaining complete extraction of iron .
Except for iron, it is interesting to note that the extraction efficiency for the other metals was similar for lettuce and cabbage samples extracted with only 0.14 mol l−1 nitric acid.
Using the cabbage samples, a study of particle size was performed, where this parameter was varied from 63 to 150 μm, with the samples being sonicated for 10 min.
The particle size was an important factor for Ca, Fe, Mn and Zn extraction, where recoveries of ca. 100% were obtained with <75 μm particle size. This was confirmed by applying the t-test at a 95% confidence level to the results obtained with wet digestion, also using the same particle sizes. This test was performed because different results could be produced due to the natural distribution of the metal in the different particle sizes . In this way, the <75 μm particle size was chosen for evaluation of the accuracy.
The accuracy of ultrasonic extraction for the proposed method was determined by comparing the results with those obtained using a different digestion method for lettuce, cabbage and a medicinal plant (Equisetum pyramidale), as well as by analysing different CRM materials, such as spinach (NIST 1570a) and apple leaves (NIST 1515). The results, presented in Table 3 , show that no statistical differences were observed at the 95% confidence level, indicating that the fast extraction method with sonication is applicable for this type of sample, opening the possibility of its application for other samples.
The results for iron are not shown, since its recovery (ca. 98%) was only acceptable for cabbage (see Fig. 1).
The proposed method permitted a fast, easy and inexpensive extraction of Ca, Mg, Mn and Zn in different plant materials, and in some instances for Fe.
All parameters studied (acid concentration, sonication time and particle size) influence the extraction efficiency. The results obtained with this method and with wet digestion were similar, allowing the substitution of hazardous and/or problematic handling methods for routine analyses in environmental or agronomic studies.