The determination of copper species is of special concern in both environmental and process monitoring. Copper is an essential element at trace level (i.e. catalytic action in heme synthesis) , but the intake of large quantities can be toxic. Sources of copper poisoning include beverages from vending machines, copper or brass vessels, and sometimes water supplies. Monitoring Cu(II) concentration is also becoming important in microelectronics fabrication industry. Thus, the development of simple, reliable, and low-cost techniques for copper determination is essential.
Several electrochemical methods have been worked out for the determination of copper(II), most of them employing anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV) in which preconcentration proceeded by either electrodeposition on mercury electrode or chemical accumulation at chemically modified electrodes . One main advantage of the second approach belongs to the ability of preconcentration at open circuit so that no addition of any buffer or electrolyte in the accumulation medium is required. Also, chemical preconcentration can provide improved selectivity. Various modifiers were used for the chemical accumulation of copper species prior to their voltammetric quantification, including ion exchange resins , chelating polymers , clays , and organic ligands .
Chemically modified electrodes involving silica-based materials have recently attracted much attention in the field of electroanalytical chemistry , because they allow to couple advantageously the attractive properties of these materials to a selected redox process. Among them, organically modified silicates (ORMOSILs) hold considerable promise in the development of new devices for analytical and electrochemical applications due to their good mechanical and chemical stability, and the ease with which they can be prepared and modified . Indeed, ORMOSILs combine the rigid three-dimensional structure of the ceramic part (inorganic lattice) with the intrinsic chemical properties of the organic moieties (binding ability, hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance, ion exchange, chelating properties, etc.). Among the wide range of organic functionalities grafted on silica, the covalent attachment of amine groups on silica gel surfaces by reaction with aminopropyl-triethoxysilane has been largely investigated by Vansant and co-workers . The resulting material is liable to take up copper(II) species from dilute solutions , and Cu(II) complexes in organically modified silicate gels have been characterized by various techniques . It was shown recently that these complexes can undergo charge-transfer reactions when incorporated within carbon paste .
In a preliminary report , we have performed a semi-quantitative electrochemical evaluation of polysiloxane-immobilized amine ligands with respect to Cu(II) uptake from an aqueous solution. In the present paper, we plan to evaluate carbon paste electrodes modified with aminopropyl-grafted silica gel (APS) as an electrochemical sensor for copper species in aqueous medium. As compared to the voltammetric detection of this analyte with a pure silica-modified carbon paste electrode in ammoniacal medium , this approach would benefit from the covalent binding of the chelating agent (aminopropyl group) to the silica backbone, without requiring an additional reagent (i.e. ammonia) in the preconcentration medium.
All the electrolyte and buffer reagents were of analytical grade and purchased from Riedel de Häen. Copper(II) was used as Cu(NO3)2 obtained from Prolabo. All solutions were prepared with high-purity water (18 MΩ cm−1) from a millipore milliQ water purification system. Silica gels were the chromatographic grade Kieselgel 40 (K40), Kieselgel 60 (K60), and Kieselgel 100 (K100) from Merck. The reactant (3-aminopropyl)-triethoxysilane (APTEOS) 99% and the toluene solvent were purchased from Aldrich. The APS was prepared by refluxing a suspension made of 6 ml APTEOS in 50 ml dry toluene with 5 g silica gel, for 2 h. The solid was then filtered off, washed several times with toluene, and dried overnight at 120°C (Fig. 1 ).
APS-modified carbon paste electrodes (APS-MCPEs) were prepared by mixing weighed amounts of APS, high purity graphite (Ultra F, 200 mesh, from Johnson Matthey), and mineral oil (Aldrich) thoroughly until obtaining a uniformly wetted paste. Portions of the resulting composite material were then packed into the end of a home-made PTFE cylindrical tube (geometric area: 0.3 cm2) equipped with a screwing stainless steel piston. The surface was smoothed on a piece of weighing paper. When necessary, a new surface was obtained by pushing an excess of paste out of the tube, removing this excess, and polishing again mechanically the electrode surface.
Anodic stripping square wave voltammetry was conducted with the μ-Autolab potentiostat and GPES electrochemical analysis system (Eco Chemie), equipped with a three-electrode system mounted on a 50 ml cell. All voltammograms were recorded at room temperature. Working electrode was a home-made silica-modified carbon paste electrode (SMCPE), the counter-electrode was a platinum wire and an Ag/AgCl electrode (Metrohm, no. 6.0733.100) served as reference. Square wave voltammetry was applied with a 50 mV modulation amplitude, a 100 MHz frequency, and a 5 mV step potential. All potentials are referred to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode.
APS samples were characterized by various techniques. Particle-size distributions were measured with the Horiba laser scattering particle-size distribution analyzer LA920. The measurement principle is based on the Mie scattering theory. The apparatus was equipped with two light sources: a He–Ne laser (632.8 nm) and a W halogen lamp. Pore-size distribution, total pore volume, and specific surface area of silica gels were estimated on the basis of nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms at the temperature of liquid nitrogen. The measurements were performed using the Coulter SA 3100 apparatus. The amine content of the APS samples was determined by acid–base titration, which was monitored by the Metrohm 691 pH meter (electrode: Metrohm, no. 6.0222.100). Quantitative analysis of copper(II) in solution was made by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, plasma 2000, Perkin-Elmer): this was applied to the characterization of copper adsorption processes from batch suspensions of APS samples.
For analytical determination of the concentration of copper(II) in aqueous samples, a two-step procedure was followed. The electrode was first immersed in a preconcentration solution containing the target analyte at a given concentration and selected pH (acetate buffer made of 0.1 M sodium acetate adjusted at the appropriate pH value by HNO3 addition), where the accumulation of copper(II) species was achieved chemically by binding to amine ligands, at open circuit, under constant stirring. The electrode was then removed from the accumulation cell, rinsed with water, and transferred to the separate voltammetric cell containing only a supporting electrolyte (10−1 M HNO3), while applying immediately a cathodic potential to the electrode to ensure reduction of all the previously accumulated species. Typically, after a 1 min electrolysis at −0.5 V, the voltammetric monitoring was performed in the anodic stripping square wave mode. Note that the deposition of metallic copper was carried out directly after the immersion of the electrode in the electrolyte cell and under quiet conditions in order to prevent any loss of analyte in the bulk solution, which could occur as a result of desorption of the previously accumulated copper(II) species if no cathodic potential was applied. For example, a 5–10% decrease in the voltammetric response was observed when performing the electrolysis step under stirring. No deaeration of the solutions was required during both the chemical accumulation and electrochemical detection steps. If complete desorption was ensured, the same electrode surface could be reused without any treatment for typically 40 successive experiments. Further use required a renewal of the electrode surface by mechanical smoothing, as usual for sensors based on carbon paste .
The synthetic procedure for the covalent grafting of aminopropyl groups on silica gel involves two successive steps: first the physical adsorption of APTEOS on the silica surface, and then a hydrolysis–condensation reaction of the aminosilane with the silanol groups . This reaction was applied to three silica gel samples displaying different porosities and specific surface areas (Table 1 ). As expected, the presence of the organic groups on silica resulted in a decrease of the material porosity, which is easily explained by the intrinsic volume of these groups on the internal surface of the gels. These groups therefore occupy a part of the porous volume of the materials, as demonstrated by results of Table 1, where significant decrease of the total pore volume was observed upon modification. Because of the finite size of the organic group, this effect was more important for small-pore silica samples. For the same reasons, the specific surface area after synthesis was found to decrease significantly as compared to the same material before synthesis by 53% for K40, 47% for K60, and 29% for K100.
Quantitative analysis of the amount of amine ligands immobilized on the three silica samples was achieved by indirect acid–base titration . The results summarized in Table 1 show that the amine charge is not only controlled by the specific surface area of the silica gel (that is the number of available surface silanol groups), but also by its porosity. For instance, the amine charge of K100 is limited by its rather low specific surface area, while that of K40 is of the same order of magnitude as that of K60 in spite of a higher specific surface area (550 for K40 as compared to 460 for K60), which can be explained by steric limitations due to the smaller pores of K40.
When APS samples were brought in contact with a copper(II) solution, they immediately turned blue, the characteristic color of the amine–copper(II) complexes formed according to Eq. (1) . SiO2PrNH2+Cu(II)⇔SiO2PrNH2Cu(II) The capacity of bonded phases for Cu(II) was determined by batch experiments (100 mg APS in 50 ml solution containing 10−2 M Cu(NO3)2 at pH 6). It was observed that the ratio between the amount of amine groups on silica and the observed copper capacity was always the same whatever the APS material. It is concluded from these batch experiments that the adsorption of Cu(II) by APS is controlled by the thermodynamic equilibrium.
The above reaction (Eq. (1)) can be exploited for the preconcentration of Cu(II) species prior to their voltammetric quantification by using an APS-MCPE. As compared to carbon paste electrodes modified with pure silica (applied for the determination of copper in ammoniacal medium ), this novel approach prevents from the use of an additional reactant in the solution, since the complexing agent is already attached to the silica-based modifier. The evaluation of the APS-modified electrode as a voltammetric sensor for Cu(II) species requires optimizing the experimental parameters liable to affect both the accumulation and detection steps.
As the APS material is an electronic insulator, the voltammetric detection of the previously accumulated Cu(II) species implies a desorption process. According to the investigation of the binding properties of APS towards Cu(II) as a function of pH , an acidic medium was selected as suitable for desorption according to Eq. (2). Cu(II) species leached out from the APS at the electrode/solution interface can be detected directly by reduction (Eq. (3)), but a thorough electrolysis followed by ASV (Eqs. (3) and (4)) was found to be more sensitive and quantitative. SiO2PrNH2Cu2++H+⇔SiO2PrNH3++Cu2+ Cu2++2e−⇔Cu(0) Cu(0)−2e−⇔Cu2+ Fig. 2 demonstrates that the APS-MCPE is sensitive to Cu(II) species after their accumulation at open circuit, and that the detection by ASV exhibited higher sensitivity as lower was the pH of the medium. A detection medium made of 0.1 M HNO3 was selected as the most appropriate to give reproducible results and long-term stability of the sensor. A comparison of three-waveform modes (linear, differential pulse, and square wave) has revealed that the three modes gave a well-defined peak around +0.1 V with the highest sensitivity observed for anodic stripping square wave voltammetry, which was therefore chosen for further experiments.
To get quantitative determination in ASV, complete desorption and subsequent electrolysis should be achieved or, at least, the stripping peak must be proportional to the amount of previously accumulated species. Fig. 3 shows that 80% of the maximum signal was obtained after an electrolysis of only 1 min, indicating a rather high transport rate for the analyte at the electrode/solution interface in spite of the fact that the Cu(II) species are mainly located on the internal surface of the silica particles.
The response of the APS-MCPE was obviously affected by the composition of the paste. By using carbon pastes containing various ratios of each component and applying them to the analysis of a 10 μM Cu(II) solution, the square wave voltammetric signals were affected by the percentage of both APS and mineral oil contents (Fig. 4 A and B). It was observed that the sensitivity of the sensor first increased rapidly with increasing the silica content in the paste up to about 20%, and then started to level off and even slightly decreased with higher loadings (Fig. 4A). The rapid rise in the voltammetric signals is of course due to the increase of binding sites at the electrode surface, while the apparent saturation at levels higher than 20% is rather explained by the diminution of the real electrode surface area (proportional to the carbon content in the paste) for the same geometric area. The effect of mineral oil is illustrated in Fig. 4B, and displays a bell-shaped evolution with a maximum around 22%. Too high oil contents would result in increasing the hydrophobic character of the electrode surface, limiting somewhat the interaction of APS with the analyte solution, while too low loadings resulted in rather poor reproducibility due to the lack in compaction of the electrode material.
As the ability of APS to concentrate Cu(II) species from dilute solutions arises mainly from the chelating properties of the immobilized amine ligand, the accumulation process is thought to be highly sensitive to pH (Fig. 5 ). The electrode response was very low below pH 5, then increased with pH to reach a maximum value at pH 8. The analysis at pH higher than 8.5 was not allowed because of the precipitation of Cu(II) species in the form of insoluble copper hydroxide. Below pH 6, the ligand properties of amine groups is limited by their acid–base properties (for instance at pH 6 more than 99.99% of these groups are in their protonated form, Eq. (2) shifted towards the formation of ammonium). On the other hand, it could be surprising that these groups still display chelating properties at pH values as low as 6, but this is possible and explained by the very high local concentration of amine groups within the silica matrix (>1 M) enabling the mass action to act as a driving force for the complexation with copper(II).
Because the speed of the accumulation process is mainly governed by the diffusion of the analyte into the mesoporous structure of APS, another parameter of primary importance is the silica gel porosity. Fig. 6 compares the effect of the accumulation time on the response of three APS-MCPEs containing the same mass ratio of three different samples of aminopropyl-grafted silica: APS-K40, APS-K60, and APS-K100. These samples differ from each other mainly by their pore size (Table 1). Despite the higher capacity for copper exhibited by APS-K40 and APS-K60 with respect to that of APS-K100, the electrochemical monitoring clearly demonstrates that the electrode prepared with the large-pore APS-K100 resulted in a more sensitive response than that obtained with APS-K60, while the smallest signals were obtained by using the smallest-pore APS-K40. These results allow to conclude to a kinetic control of the accumulation and subsequent detection of copper at the APS-MCPE, and that the porosity of the organically modified silica gel is a key factor in optimizing the sensor’s sensitivity, more important than the amount of amine groups grafted on the material.
The optimal parameters selected from the above experiments have been applied to build a calibration curve. The accumulation was performed for 10 min in a solution containing various copper(II) concentrations at pH 7. The detection was carried out in 0.1 M HNO3 after 1 min electrolysis at −0.5 V, followed by an ASV analysis in the square wave mode. A linear response in the 5×10−8–2×10−7 M concentration range was observed, which was followed by a decrease in sensitivity at higher concentrations. A detection limit of 3×10−9 M was calculated for a signal-to-noise ratio of 3. This value is better than or of the same order of magnitude as than those previously reported for other chemically modified electrodes.
By using this electrochemical sensor, the copper concentration in laboratory tap water was measured by the standard addition method, and a value of 1.6×10−7 M was obtained, which was in good agreement with the certified value obtained from the “Service Central d’Analyse” of the CNRS at Lyon, France (1.5×10−7 M), allowing to conclude a good accuracy of the proposed method.
The ability of aminopropyl groups grafted on silica gel (APS) to adsorb Cu(II) by complexation with the amine moieties can be exploited for the voltammetric detection of copper(II) species after their accumulation at open circuit, by resorting to an APS-modified carbon paste electrode. The sensor exhibited the highest response when using silica-based materials displaying the largest porosity, which imparted fast diffusion rates for both the analyte in the preconcentration step and the electrolyte in the detection step. Significant improvement was observed over the use of pure silica-modified electrode because of the presence of the amine groups directly attached to the silica matrix. The voltammetric response was linear in the 5×10−8–2×10−7 M concentration range for a 10 min preconcentration time at open circuit. The present work illustrates the interest of silica-based materials, chemically modified with an organic ligand covalently attached to the backbone, for designing new electrode modifiers liable to be applied to chemical sensing.