The application of conducting polymers as supports for platinum catalyst particles for the anodic oxidation of hydrogen or small organic molecules has been the subjects of many investigations. The main reason for studying such composite material is the extraordinary electrocatalytic activity, which is comparable with or even exceeds that of bare platinum at relatively low platinum loadings. The character of the composite materials, in particular the size, loadings and distribution of the platinum catalyst particles, the structure of the conducting polymer matrix, as well as the electrocatalytic effect have been studied recently with electrochemical, morphological and spectroscopic approaches, such as cyclic voltammetry (CV) , scanning electron microcopy (SEM) , transmission electron microcopy (TEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) etc. As is well known, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) can reveal useful information about the interface, its structure and the reactions taking place there. There are two principal approaches to modelling the impedance characteristics of conducting polymers. One assumes a uniform, homogeneous film, the other deals with a porous film . Prasad and Munichandraiah used a.c. impedance methods to study the adsorption and electrooxidation of methanol on polyaniline without dispersed catalyst particles at CH3OH concentrations higher than 1 M . To the knowledge of the present authors, however, little work has been done on the impedance properties of the composite electrodes of platinum-modified polyaniline films and their electrocatalytic effect on oxidation of hydrogen or small molecules. Grzeszczuk and Poks studied the H2 evolution reaction (her) performance of colloidal platinum nanoparticles incorporated in polyaniline by d.c. polarization and a.c. impedance methods . It can be predicted that the modified electrode ∣ solution interface properties, related to the amount, size and distribution of platinum particles within the polymer matrix, will, no doubt, be of importance to influence the electrocatalytic activity of the platinum-modified polyaniline electrode for methanol oxidation.
The purpose of the present paper is to study: (i) the effect of potential polarization modes on the deposition of platinum particles and the relaxation of the polyaniline film; (ii) the electrochemical impedance behavior of both pure polyaniline film and the composite electrodes of platinum-modified polyaniline film; and (iii) the relationship between the electrocatalytic effect of the platinum-modified polyaniline film and the size, amount and distribution of the platinum particles which are characterized by SEM technique.
All electrochemical experiments were performed with a CHI650A potentiostat/galvanostat by using a double-compartment glass cell with a three-electrode configuration. The substrate working electrode was a platinum disk encapsulated in epoxy resin and the working surface was the round face of the disk (geometric area: 0.0177 cm2). A platinum sheet was used as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode. All potentials in the paper are presented on the SCE scale. The working electrode was polished mechanically using emery paper (grade 1200–1500) to a mirror surface and then cleaned by potential cycling between −0.2 and 1.2 V at 50 mV s−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 until a stable voltammogram was obtained.
The polyaniline film was formed on the platinum working electrode by the CV technique at 50 mV s−1 between −0.2 and 0.9 V for 13 cycles in solutions of 0.1 M aniline+0.5 M H2SO4. The film thickness (2.25 μm) can be calculated by the height of the first anodic peak in the redox process of polyaniline, as reported in Ref. . After preparation, the polyaniline film was (i) treated in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with cyclic potential polarization (−0.1 to 0.8 V or −0.25 to 0.65 V) at 50 mV s−1 for 25 cycles, or with constant potential polarization (−0.1 or −0.25 V) for 900 s; or (ii) modified with platinum particles in 3 mM H2PtCl6+0.5 M H2SO4 solution by cyclic potential polarization (−0.1 to 0.8 V or −0.25 to 0.65 V) at 50 mV s−1 for 25 cycles, or by constant potential polarization (−0.1 or −0.25 V) for 900 s. Prior to the dispersion of the platinum, the electrode covered with polyaniline film was soaked in the 3 mM H2PtCl6+0.5 M H2SO4 solution for 15 min. The amount of platinum deposited into the polyaniline film can be estimated from measurements of the charge involved during the reduction of Pt4+ to Pt0 .
EIS measurements for the pure polyaniline film (without deposited platinum particles) and the platinum-modified polyaniline film electrode formed in the abovementioned steps (i) and (ii), respectively, were performed in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under open circuit potential in the a.c. frequency range 100 kHz–0.1 Hz with an excitation signal of 5 mV. The real surface area of the dispersed electrode was calculated from the hydrogen adsorption–desorption region in a cyclic voltammogram (CVs) recorded on the platinum electrocatalyst under an N2 atmosphere . Electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol on the platinum-modified polyaniline film was examined in 0.5 M CH3OH+0.5 M H2SO4 solution by a CV technique at 5 mV s−1 between −0.1 and 0.7 V. All the electrochemical experiments were carried out at 30±1 °C. The surface morphology of the electrodes was observed by SEM (Model S-570, Hitachi Ltd).
Aniline was purified by distillation with zinc dust and stored under nitrogen gas. All other reagents were of analytical grade and used as received. All the solutions were prepared with twice distilled water.
As is well known, platinum particles can be dispersed within the conducting polymer film by constant potential or cyclic potential polarization, while the structure and nature of the conducting polymer film will have a significant effect on the deposition of platinum particles. Therefore, the dependence of impedance spectra of the conducting polymer matrix on the potential polarization modes may be considered to study the characteristics of film structures and the kinetics and mechanisms of charge transfer and ion transport in the metal ∣ polymer film interface and polymer film ∣ electrolyte interface. After preparation by the CV method in this study, the polyaniline film was polarized by cyclic potential polarization or constant potential polarization in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution for film relaxation. Fig. 1 (a and b) shows the impedance spectra of the polyaniline film in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution after the relaxation with the cyclic potential polarization. It can be seen that, although the potential limits are shifted positively from −0.25–0.65 V to −0.1–0.8 V, both of the impedance spectra of the polyaniline film display similar characteristics, i.e., a depressed semi-circle in the high frequency region and a straight line with a slope of nearly 45° in the low frequency region, which is typical of impedance spectra of polymer film-coated metals in the asymmetric metal/film/electrolyte configuration . As reported earlier, the presence of the depressed semi-circles (i.e. impedance dispersion) in the high frequency region is ascribed to the blocking properties of a rough electrode which render extremely slow the faradaic process of the ionic exchange at the polymer ∣ electrolyte interface, while the straight line in the low frequency is due to the Warburg diffusion impedance . In spite of the similar shape of the impedance spectra, there is an obvious difference between the diameters of the two semi-circles. That is, the diameter of the semi-circle in Fig. 1(a) is larger than that in Fig. 1(b). In other words, the polyaniline film relaxed with the more negative potential limit (−0.25 to 0.65 V) presents a higher electrochemical charge transfer resistance (R ct) than the film relaxed with the more positive potential limit (−0.1 to 0.8 V). This agrees with the fact that the polyaniline film which has been polarized more negatively (i.e. in the highly reduced state) usually exhibits lower electronic conductivity, i.e., higher resistance .
As a comparison, the impedance spectra of the polyaniline film in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution after the relaxation with the constant potential polarization mode are shown in Fig. 2 (a and b). Obviously, the plot in Fig. 2(b) also contains a semi-circle in the high frequency region and a straight line with slope of nearly 45° in the low frequency region, similar to the impedance characteristics of the polyaniline film after the relaxation with cyclic potential polarization mode, as shown in Fig. 1(a and b). However, the plot in Fig. 2(a) shows only about half of a semi-circle in all the frequency regions and no diffusion impedance appears in the low frequency region. In addition, the diameter of the semi-circle in Fig. 2(a) is apparently larger than that in Fig. 2(b). On the other hand, it can be found by comparison that the polyaniline film relaxed with constant potential polarization (Fig. 2) shows a much larger charge transfer resistance (R ct) than the film relaxed with cyclic potential polarization (Fig. 1), which probably indicates the slow charge transfer in the polyaniline film ∣ H2SO4 solution interface resulting from the constant potential polarization mode.
Interpretation of EIS measurements is usually done by fitting the experimental impedance spectra to an equivalent electric circuit. That is, an electric circuit combined by some physical elements can be built that has an impedance spectrum identical to that of the electrochemical system under investigation. However, it is often difficult to find an unambiguous physical meaning for particular circuit elements. Moreover, the situation is further complicated in the case of conducting polymers by the different opinions concerning the mode of transport of charge carriers within the polymer film . On the basis of the impedance diagrams we obtained, an equivalent circuit model can be suggested, as is shown in Fig. 3 . In this circuit, R s is the uncompensated solution resistance, R f is interpreted as the film resistance of the polyaniline film (resulting from the penetration of the electrolyte), C f is the capacitance of the polyaniline film, R ct denotes the charge transfer resistance, C dl is the double layer capacitance, and Z d the Warburg diffusion impedance. It should be indicated that the equivalent circuit is more suitable to model the impedance data in Fig. 1(a and b) and Fig. 2(b). As for the impedance data in Fig. 2(a), since there is no clear Warburg impedance in the plot, the element Z d related to the Warburg diffusion impedance should be omitted from the equivalent circuit.
In contrast to the pure polyaniline film relaxed with cyclic potential or constant potential polarization without platinum deposition, in the following experiments, the polyaniline film is modified with platinum particles by the same potential polarization modes as used above, i.e., cyclic potential polarization (−0.25 to 0.65 V or −0.1 to 0.8 V), or constant potential polarization (−0.25 or −0.1 V). Fig. 4 (a and b) and Fig. 5(a and b) show the impedance spectra of the platinum-modified polyaniline film in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. It is seen that the impedance spectra of the polyaniline film modified with platinum particles by cyclic potential (Fig. 4) or constant potential polarization (Fig. 5 ) also exhibit the impedance characteristics of polymer-coated metals in the asymmetric metal/film/electrolyte configuration, i.e., a depressed semi-circle in the high frequency region and a straight line with a slope of nearly 45° in the low frequency region, although the semi-circle in Fig. 5(a) seems not to be defined clearly. In comparison with the impedance spectra in Figs. 1 and 2, it is found that the diameters of the semi-circles in Figs. 4 and 5 declines greatly, in particular the semi-circles of polyaniline film modified with platinum by constant potential polarization (Fig. 5). In other words, the charge transfer resistance (R ct) of the platinum-modified polyaniline film is much lower than that of the pure polyaniline film with the same potential polarization mode, as is shown in Table 1 . This means that the deposition of platinum particles inside the polyaniline matrix may lead to a faster charge transfer in the parallel polyaniline film ∣ solution and platinum particles ∣ solution interface, compared to the charge transfer in the originally single polyaniline film ∣ solution interface. The reason may be suggested as follows. For the pure polyaniline film in the asymmetric metal/polymer film/electrolyte configuration, there exists only one film ∣ electrolyte interface which makes a contribution to the double layer capacitance (C dl), as shown in Fig. 3. With the deposition of platinum particles within the polyaniline matrix, a new phase interface, i.e., a platinum particles ∣ electrolyte interface, will be formed, which will certainly reduce the original interface of polyaniline film ∣ electrolyte and consequently produce an additional double layer capacitance (C′dl) in parallel with the former double layer capacitance (C dl) related to the polyaniline film ∣ electrolyte interface. This implies in short that the polyaniline film modified with platinum particles by different modes of potential polarization (e.g. constant potential or cyclic potential polarization) may give rise to very different interfacial structures, perhaps reflecting a different distribution or state of the platinum particles deposited by the two protocols.
To explain the different electrocatalytic activity of platinum-modified polyaniline film formed by varying platinum electrodeposition modes (i.e. cyclic potential or constant potential polarization), the characterization of platinum particles, in particular the amount, size, real surface area and distribution within the polymer matrix, is of great significance. As is well known, the platinum specific surface area, calculated from the electrochemically active surface area and the platinum loading, seems to be a useful macroscopic quantity to characterize the size of dispersed catalysts. As a first approach, a simple model consists in assuming homogeneous distributed spherical particles. On the basis of such an assumption, the characteristic particle diameter related to the platinum specific surface area can be calculated . Due to the ideal assumption (i.e. homogeneous distribution and spherical particles) as stated above, usually there are differences between the theoretically calculated size of platinum particles and the real size characterized by TEM observation . Hence, we use the data of platinum loading and the real surface area calculated, respectively, from the coulombic charge of platinum deposition and hydrogen adsorption/desorption. Table 2 gives the relevant information on physical characteristics of the different platinum-modified polyaniline film electrodes formed by varying platinum electrodeposition modes. As can be observed, there exist differences in each physical parameter if the platinum electrodeposition modes are changed. Moreover, even though the same mode of platinum electrodeposition is selected, the physical characteristics of the resulting platinum particles vary, associated with the applied potential limits (in cyclic potential polarization) or selected potentials (in constant potential polarization). It can be thought that the deposition of platinum at highly negative potentials or potential limits may result in the formation of deposits with an increase of amount and a higher active concentration at the surface, thus providing an increase of the apparent current density of methanol oxidation, as discussed later. As a powerful surface physical technique, SEM is used to provide morphological information of both the polyaniline matrix and the dispersed platinum particles, especially their size and distribution. Fig. 6 (a and b) shows SEM micrographs of the surface of the pure polyaniline (without deposited platinum) relaxed with cyclic potential or constant potential polarization. Similarly to the earlier reports , as can be seen, the polyaniline film shows a loose and fibrillar structure, which is typical of a thick polyaniline film. Also there no great difference between the polyaniline film relaxed with cyclic potential or constant potential polarization. Fig. 6(c and d) shows the SEM micrographs of platinum catalyst particles that have been deposited into polyaniline film by cyclic potential (−0.1 to 0.8 V) or constant potential (−0.25 V) polarization. Based on the previous report , the white spots in the micrographs in Fig. 6(c and d) should be attributed to platinum microcenters. It can be seen, on the one hand, that for the two different electrodeposition modes most of the platinum particles are distributed in an almost homogeneous manner at the surface of the polyaniline film in approximately spherical-like shape with diameters around 0.1–0.4 μm, apart from the localized regions where some platinum particles merge to form a relatively large deposit. On the other hand, it is seen that both the number and size of platinum particles increase with increasing platinum loading, particularly the particle number. Apparently, these surface morphology results of platinum particles are in accordance with the loading and real surface area data as shown in Table 2.
A strong dependence of the platinum catalytic activity on the catalyst particle structure and its distribution within the matrix of conducting polymers is marked for the oxidation reaction of small molecules. On the basis of the impedance results as stated above, the electrocatalytic activity of platinum-modified polyaniline film electrodes is studied for the oxidation of methanol. The electrocatalytic electrodes are the same as used before to perform the impedance experiments (in Figs. 1, 2, 4 and 5). The CVs of electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol with the electrocatalytic electrodes are shown in Fig. 7 . It is seen that four platinum-modified polyaniline electrodes all exhibit electrocatalytic activity for the methanol oxidation, while the anodic peak current height of methanol oxidation, which appears in the positive going sweeps, changes greatly as a function of the platinum loading of the electrodeposition. As can be seen, the electrocatalytic activity is proportional to the platinum loading determined by the platinum electrodeposition modes (Table 2), which is similar to the earlier reports for methanol oxidation . In other words, larger loading and higher dispersion (i.e. high surface area of active sites) of the deposited platinum particles will be of benefit to the adsorption and oxidation reaction of methanol, corresponding to higher oxidation current densities in Fig. 7. Moreover, the increases of the electrocatalytic activity in Fig. 7 agree well with the impedance characteristics of the corresponding electrodes in Figs. 4 and 5. As indicated earlier in this work, the deposition of platinum into polyaniline film leads to significant decreases of the charge transfer resistance (R ct), compared to the pure polyaniline film. For example, as can be found in Table 1, when the constant potential polarization is changed positively from −0.25 to −0.1 V, the difference of the charge transfer resistance (R ct) decreases from 49 072 to 12 948 Ω. Corresponding to this potential shift, the platinum loading decreases from 261.2 to 131.8 μg cm−2 (Table 2), while the current peak height of methanol oxidation (≈0.62–0.64 V) diminishes from 8.2 to 4.3 mA cm−2, as is shown in Fig. 7. Similarly, for the cyclic potential polarization, when the potential limits are changed positively from −0.25–0.65 V to −0.1–0.8 V, the charge transfer resistance (R ct) difference between the polyaniline film and platinum-modified polyaniline film decreases from 2343 to 966 Ω (Table 1), the loading diminishes from 222.5 to 112.4 μg cm−2 (Table 2), and the current peak height of methanol oxidation also decreases from 5.9 to 3.2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7). In other words, for a certain potential polarization mode (i.e. constant potential or cyclic potential), the larger the difference between the R ct of pure polyaniline film and the platinum-modified polyaniline film, the greater is the platinum loading and the higher the electrocatalytic activity for methanol oxidation. Therefore, the relationship between impedance characteristics and electrocatalytic activity can be established.
From the analysis of the experimental data obtained by EIS, SEM and CVs methods, the following important conclusions can be drawn:
(i) In comparison with the pure polyaniline film ∣ H2SO4 solution interface, the deposition of platinum into a polyaniline matrix greatly reduces the electrochemical charge transfer resistance (R ct) in the platinum-modified polyaniline film ∣ H2SO4 solution interface, probably reflecting a remarkable interfacial structure change after the deposition of platinum particles.
(ii) Both constant potential and cyclic potential polarization can be used to deposit platinum particles into the polyaniline matrix. Moreover, the fixed potentials in constant potential polarization or the potential limits in cyclic potential polarization have great effects on the efficiency of the deposition process and nature of the deposited platinum particles, such as their amount, size and distribution, which can be characterized by SEM observation.
(iii) The electrocatalytic activity of platinum-modified polyaniline film electrodes for methanol oxidation is connected to the platinum loading and real surface area. Also, the relationship between impedance characteristics and electrocatalytic activity can be established.