The precious metals occur in geological materials at trace and ultratrace levels and their direct determination is beyond the scope of atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). Hence large number of research papers are being published worldwide on separation and pre-concentration techniques using solvent extraction , ion exchange , co-precipitation , cyanidation sorption, including a review article published recently . Amongst sorbents, AC is being widely used as multielement trace collector , mostly in presence of suitable complexing agents. The authors in their previous published work, preconcentrated on AC, rare earth elements (REE) in absence of complexing agent and selected transition elements in presence of complexing agent, pyridyl azo resorcinol (PAR) . Amongst precious metals, AC is widely used for preconcentration of gold from natural water and geological materials . The gold is quantitatively sorbed on to AC, in presence of P-dimethyl aminobenzene-rhodanine and the Ag is quantitatively sorbed on to AC in presence of complexing agents like, dithiozone and ammonium salt of dithiophosphoric acid, 0,0-diethylester . Both Au and Ag sorbed on to AC as dithiozonate complexes . The Pd was preconcentrated on to AC in presence of cyclohexane 1,2-dione dioxime . The Pd and Pt in sea water and Au, Pd and Pt in ashed vegetation were determined based on preconcentration on to AC. The determination of Au, Ag and Pd in single AC ashed solution is ruled out as Ag and Pd get adsorbed to silica crucible during ignition and are not recoverable quantitatively unlike Au. The preconcentration of Au, Ag and Pd together on to AC from single sample solution (of geological samples) and their quantitative recovery by wet ashing is largely unknown. Hence, flame AAS method is developed based on pre-concentration of Au, Ag and Pd on to AC and their recovery by wet digestion. The details are presented in this paper.
Activated carbon (Proanalysi, Dermstadt, Germany) was purified by treatment with hydrofluoric acid (HF) and HCl. The quartz double distilled water, HNO3 and HCl were used throughout the work.
All standard stock solutions of Au, Ag and Pd (1 mg ml−1), were prepared from specpure (Johnson Matthey) chemicals following procedures as given below.
A 1.0 g of gold chloride, AuCl3, containing 25% of Au (taken in 250-ml beaker) was dissolved in minimum volume (10 ml) of aqua regia and evaporated on water bath to near dryness. The residue was then treated with 5 ml of 50% (v/v) HCl twice and evaporated each time to near dryness, dissolved in 50 ml of 50% (v/v) HCl and made to 250 ml in volumetric flask with distilled water. The solution was standardised gravimetrically by reduction with hydroquinone .
A 0.2672 g of Ammonium chloro palladite, (NH4)2Pd2Cl6, was dissolved in 20 ml of 50% (v/v) HCl and heated on waterbath. The cooled solution was made to 100 ml volume with water and standardised titrimetrically .
A 0.158 g of silver nitrate, AgNO3, (dried at 110°C) was dissolved in about 20 ml quartz distilled water and made up to 100 ml with 10% (v/v) HNO3 and stored in plastic bottle away from light.
Just before use the working standards of Au, Ag and Pd of concentration 0.1, 0.3, 0.6, and 1.0 μg ml−1 were prepared separately from intermediate stock standard (10 μg ml−1) by appropriate dilution and by maintaining 10% (v/v) HCl concentration except for Ag, which was maintained in 10% (v/v) HNO3. The calibration graph was obtained by aspirating pure calibration working standards directly and it follows Beer's law.
Flame AAS from GBC Scientific Equipment Pvt Ltd., Australia, model AVANTA-P was used for measuring Au, Ag and Pd in air — acetylene flame. The operating conditions are given in Table 1 . In addition NA, K, Ca, Mg, Al, Fe, Mn, Ni, Cd and Cu were also determined by flame AAS . The ICP-AES equipment (8410, GBC, Australia) was used for the measurement of Pt, Ru, Rh , REE, Y, Sc and V . The concentration of uranium was measured by Fluorimetry .
A 10 g amount of finely powdered sample (−200 mesh) was taken in porcelain dish (100 ml volume), roasted at 650°C for 30 min, transferred into 400 ml beaker and heated on sandbath twice with aqua regia (50 and 30 ml) evaporating each time to moist residue. The residue was then digested with 10 ml of concentrated HCl twice and evaporated each time to moist residue, followed by the digestion of sample with 5 ml of conc. HCl for 2 min (for effective extraction of analytes) on waterbath. The sample solution was further diluted to about 100 ml with water and digested for 30 min. The solution was filtered (Whatman No. 540) into 250 ml beaker, washed thoroughly with hot water, cooled and adjusted the pH to ∼1 with ammonia solution (The total volume obtained shall be maximum of 200 ml). The filtrate was treated with 0.5 g of powdered activated carbon (AC), stirred occasionally (stirring for 2 min for every 30 min) for 4 h and filtered (Whatman 540, cut to circles of dia 50 mm) using vacuum filtration unit. The AC pellet along with filter paper transferred back into the same beaker (250-ml). The traces of AC adhering to glass container washed back into the same beaker with 50% (v/v) HNO3. The whole solution was boiled initially with 20 ml of conc. HNO3 for about 5 min (to oxidise easily oxidizable organic matter) and then with 5 ml of HClO4 to completely oxidise and solubulize the carbon containing the analytes. Added 1 ml of HCl to the clear solution thus obtained, made to 10 ml in volumetric flask and aspirated into flame AAS for determination of Au, Ag and Pd. The blank was carried through the entire procedure and made to 10 ml.
The effects of several experimental parameters on the sorption of Au, Ag and Pd were studied at two different concentrations, i.e by spiking 200 ml of distilled water with 10 and 20 μg each of analyte under study and using the procedure described in Section 2.4. These parameters comprise, HCl concentration, weight of AC, contact time, sample volume, HNO3 concentration (for desorption of Ag and Pd) and HNO3–HClO4 concentration (for desorption of Au, Ag and Pd).
The effect of 0.1 N mineral acids (HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4) on the sorption of analytes on to AC was studied following the procedure as given in Section 2.4. It was found experimentally that in 0.1 N HNO3 medium, sorption of Ag and Pd was 45 and 75%, whereas in 0.1 N H2SO4 medium, it was 40 and 70%, respectively, and in all 0.1 N acids, Au was quantitatively sorbed (better than 92%). Since the sorption of Au, Ag and Pd on to AC in ∼0.1 N HCl medium was quantitative when compared with ∼0.1 N HNO3 and ∼0.1 N H2SO4 medium, its effct was studied in the range from 0.05 to 2.0 N. In addition to Au, Ag and Pd, the behaviour of other three precious metals (Ru, Rh and Pt) towards the sorption on to AC in HCl medium was also studied for the sake of completeness and to see the possibility of extending the present method for determination of these elements along with Au, Ag and Pd. The results are given in Table 2 . The sorption of Au, Ag and Pd onto AC was quantitative (>92%) in the acid concentration range from 0.05 to 0.5 N. Whereas the sorption of Pt (around 20%), Ru (<1%) and Rh (<1%) was very poor may be, as they have very weak affinity towards AC and hence the quantitative determination of these elements along with Au, Ag and Pd is ruled out by the present method.
The quantity of AC was varied from 50 to 500 mg by maintaining other optimal conditions as given in the procedure (Section 2.4). The results are given in Table 3 . The optimum quantity of AC was fixed at 500 mg, although 300 mg of AC was found to be adequate, keeping in view high concentrations of competing ions arising out of complex matrix solution prepared from 10 g of sample.
The contact time of analytes with AC was varied from 10 min to 4 h by maintaining other parameters as given in procedure. The results are given in Table 4 . Although quantitative sorption of elements under study was evident from 2 h onwards, 4 h was chosen as optimum in order to allow sufficient contact time for quantitative sorption of Au, Ag and Pd on to AC from sample solution volume arising out of 10 g sample and more. It is worthwile to note that Au got quantitatively sorbed onto AC within 10 min whereas Ag and Pd took almost 4 h. Since gold has very strong affinity for organic carbon, it is held strongly (within 10 min) whereas Ag and Pd have poor affinity for carbon, it is held loosely (within 4 h). It is reported in the literature, the existence of electrostatic linking between Au and AC.
Since Au, Ag and pd are present in geological samples at trace levels, it is essential to start with atleast 10 g sample in order to analyse these elements down to 0.1 ppm. Decomposition of 10-g sample by aquaregia is likely to result in higher sample solution volume after filtration due to thorough washing. Hence volume effect was studied from 100 to 500 ml, by keeping other experimental conditions as given in procedure. It was found experimentally that at all sample volumes studied, sorption of Au, Ag and Pd was quantitative (>92%).
The effect of sample weight was studied in the range of 0.5–20 g by maintaining other parameters as given in procedure. Experimentally, quantitative sorption of analytes was observed, at all sample weights. Hence sample weight of the order of 10–20 g could easily be taken up for the analysis.
The precious metals sorbed on to AC were normally determined either directly by NAA, ETA, EDXRF or by igniting charcoal to ashes . Me et al. attempted wet ashing using several reagents to recover Au from AC, but in vain. Gold desorption from AC was attempted using sulfide and dilute NaOH/organic solvent mixtures like water–acetone–NaOH mix and iso propyl alcohol–H2O–thiourea–hydroxide mix . However, in all the cases, the recoveries are not quantitative. The authors made efforts to recover Au, Ag and Pd from AC by wet ashing using several oxidising agents like nitric acid, aquaregia, bromine aquaregia, KBrO3/HBr, KMnO4 and K2Cr2O7. The thiourea at varying concentrations was also tried. But none of the reagents able to desorb Au quantitatively from AC, though Ag and Pd were recovered quantitatively using conc. HNO3. The effect of varying concentration of HNO3 and the effect of conc. HNO3 and conc. HClO4 was studied on desorption of analytes from AC. The procedure used for sorption of analytes and optimal conditions maintained were essentially the same, as given in Section 2.4. The percent recoveries for Au, Ag and Pd from AC are given in Table 5 . Only Ag and Pd were recovered quantitatively from carbon using conc. HNO3, whereas Au recovered to the extent of 40%. In an effort to completely oxidise AC to recover gold, AC was first boiled with conc. HNO3 to oxidise the easily oxidizable organic matter and later treated with conc. perchloric acid (5 ml), to oxidise and solubilise AC completely. The method of HNO3–HClO4 treatment of carbon, yielded quantitative recoveries for Au, Ag and Pd, which was hitherto not possible by various oxidising agents even under drastic conditions. In the present method there was no need to subject calibration standards, through the entire procedure along with samples, as the sorption of analytes were quantitative when compared with other non quantitative methods reported .
Based on the experimental studies described above, the optimal conditions required for quantitative sorption of Au, Ag and Pd are as given below.
Sample weight — 10 g (variable); sample solution volume — 200 ml (variable); optimum pH — ∼1; weight of AC — 0.5 g; contact time — 4 h; desorption of Ag and Pd — by conc. HNO3 (20 ml) boiling (5 min); desorption of Au, Ag and Pd — by conc. HNO3 (20 ml) boiling (5 min), followed by boiling with HClO4 (5 ml) till AC was solubalised.
Thus by simply manipulating acidity, amount of AC and duration of contact time, quantitative sorption of Au, Ag and Pd on to AC was achieved. The use of complexing agents like rhodanine , dithiozone , dithiophosphoric acid-0,0-diethyl ester or cyclohexane 1,2-dione dioxime was not necessary to achieve >90% sorption on to AC. Thus the use of reagents is avoided. The use of powdered AC in beaker instead of column provides more surface area and prolonged contact time, which facilitates quantitative sorption in HCl medium at pH 1. The sample solution volume is not a limiting factor, with the result large sample volume arising out of 10 g or more of sample could be processed to have lower determination limits.
In dry ashing, the AC is ignited to ashes and the ash is treated with acid to recover gold. This method of recovery of gold is tedious and time consuming, requiring atleast of about 3 h. The major disadvantage of dry ashing during ignition is, the Ag and Pd get adsorbed to container (silica crucible) to various degree, depending on the ignition temperature and time duration. At 6000°C both Ag and Pd get sorbed to silica crucible to the extent of 38 and 15%, respectively, and at 800°C it was found to be 75 and 30% and under similar conditions gold does not get sorbed on to crucible. The extent of sorption given above was confirmed by dissolving, inside surface coating of silica crucible with HF–HNO3 and analysing the resultant solution for Ag and Pd. The consistent quantitative recovery of adsorbed Ag and Pd from crucible was not possible even by aqua regia treatment under drastic conditions except for gold. Hence the determination of Ag, Pd along with Au in single ashed solution is ruled out. This could be, one of the reason, why methods are largely unknown for determination of Au, Ag and Pd in the same sample solution by flame AAS through dry ash route. Hence the method of wet ashing was adopted using HNO3–HClO4 treatment. In this method, carbon was completely oxidised and solubilised using HNO3–HClO4 leaving clear solution, for the analysis of Au, Ag and Pd. In addition, the method is expeditious and not tedious when compared with dry ashing. The method is field oriented as small preconcentrated volume could be sent to main laboratory from field lab, for flame AAS measurements.
There are various ways by which metals can be sorbed on to AC from aqueous medium, (a) by complexing with chelating agent , (b) by reduction in valency state and (c) by an ion exchange process at the carbon surface . In case of Au, Ag and Pd, it could be the combination of both (b) and (c), as no complexing agent is used in the present method. It is reported that some of the noble metals get reduced to elemental state at the AC surface. The sorption of Ag on to AC in 0.1N HCl medium is quantitative and less than 50% in 0.1N HNO3 and H2SO4 medium. This suggests that AgCl may be preferred by AC, whereas nitrates and sulphates partially prevent sorption. Formation and sorption of AgCl molecules is predicted by Beinrohr et al. . Further with increase in acidity of HCl, sorption of Ag on to AC drops (Table 2) and this is probably due to formation of AgCl2 − type of species, which is not favoured by AC. Formation of this type of species is reported, at high HCl concentration . In our experiments, we found almost similar behaviour of Ag and Pd with respect to (i) contact time, both Ag and Pd quantitatively sorbed on AC in about 4 h, (ii) desorption, both recovered from AC with conc. HNO3 boiling and (iii) ignition, both gets sorbed to silica crucible when charcoal ignited to ashes. Hence chloro species of Pd, may be responsible for sorption in HCl medium. The desorption of Ag and Pd with conc. HNO3 indicated that Ag and Pd are not held very strongly on to AC like Au. This could be related to, as stated earlier, long contact time for sorption of Ag/Pd (due to poor affinity towards AC) and very short contact time for Au (strong affinity towards AC). It was found experimentally that various oxidising agents and combination of acids fail to oxidise AC completely and hence Au was not recovered completely. With combination of HNO3–HClO4 treatment, the AC was completely oxidised and solubilised fully during Perchloric acid fuming, resulting in total recovery of Au, along with Ag and Pd. The high boiling point of HClO4 and its powerful oxidising properties, facilitates complete oxidation of AC leaving clear solution. As stated earlier, the sorption of Pt, Ru and Rh on AC is very poor due to very weak affinity towards AC.
Keeping in view application to various geological samples in particular to gold and silver bearing minerals, sorption of various major, minor and trace elements and their interferences was studied at the pH of interest. The 200 ml of quartz double distilled water was spiked with the following amounts, 10 mg each of Fe, Al, Ca, Mg, Na, K; 200 μg each of Mn, Ni, Cu, Cd, Pb, V, Y, Ce, REE, U; 25 μg each of Au, Ag, and Pd. The procedure as described in Section 2.4 was followed. The sorbed elements from AC were desorbed by boiling with HNO3–HClO4, made upto 25 ml in volumetric flask and aspirated into flame AAS and ICP-AES, for the determination of trace elements (as mentioned in experimental section). From the recovery values the percent sorption values are calculated back and indicated in Table 6 . The quantitative recoveries were obtained for Au, Ag and Pd in presence of various diverse ions. The Cd, Cu and U were recovered from AC in the range of 3–8%, and do not interfere in flame AAS determination of Au, Ag and Pd.
The accuracy of the method was evaluated by using international standard reference materials i.e. Canada centre for mineral and energy technology (CANMET) standards, MA-3, MA-1b (gold ores) were used to evaluate gold and FER-1 (iron formation sample), SU-1A (Ni–Cu–Co ore), CPB-1 (lead concentrate) were used for silver. In addition ASK-3 (sulphide ore) was used to evaluate Ag and one inhouse standard, kolar gold field (KGF, India) was used for Au. The results compare well with recommended/consensus values as seen from Table 7 . The precision of the method was evaluated by taking samples in quadruplicate and making replicate measurements. The R.S.D. of the method varies between 2 and 10%. The KGF sample (22-ppm Au) was analysed with an error of ±5%. The relative error obtained by present method was within ±10% for most of the samples. As no standard reference sample for palladium is available in our laboratory, its accuracy was evaluated by spiking four sample solutions with 10 μg of Pd. The recoveries were found to be better than 90% with an R.S.D. of ±10%. The sorption of most of the major elements present in geological samples at the pH of interest are minimal and does not interfere by flame AAS.
The detection limits (3×S.D.) were calculated using procedural blank consisting of 200 ml water (adjusted to pH ∼1), 0.5-g AC taken through entire procedure as in Section 2.4. The detection limits (n=4) are given in Table 1. In order to overcome sample inhomogenity (nugget effect) and to determine Au, Ag and Pd down to 0.1 ppm, it is essential to start with 10 g sample. When 10-g sample containing (0.1 μg g−1 of Au, Ag and Pd) was taken through entire procedure and made to final volume of 10 ml, then it contains 0.1 μg ml−1 of each analyte. This works out to be 0.1 ppm.
The method is simple and economical as only AC is used for preconcentration of Au, Ag and Pd, where as the reported methods make use of specific complexing reagent. The AC is the most inexpensive sorbent used in the present method. Most of the reported methods using AC for sorption of Au use the route of dry ashing to determine Au by flame AAS. This method of igniting carbon to ashes in silica crucible is not only tedious and time consuming but also results in loss of Ag and Pd due to sorption. Thus Ag and Pd cannot be determined along with Au by dry ashing. The advantages associate with the recommended wet ashing procedure (HNO3–HClO4 treatment) are, (1) Au, Ag and Pd can be determined quantitatively by flame AAS in a single sample solution; (2) The ignition of AC to ashes is avoided, thus making the method relatively rapid. The accuracy of the method is evaluated by analysing standard reference materials (CANMET Standards). The percent R.S.D. of the method is ±10% at 0.1-ppm level based on 10-g sample. The method was applied on large number of geological samples for determination of Au, Ag and Pd. For samples where only Ag and Pd need to be determined, simple nitric acid boiling of AC, could yield quantitative recoveries. This method could be easily adopted by any laboratory as the inputs (only AC) and the operation skills required are minimal compared with methods based on co-precipitation, solvent extraction and ion exchange.