Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI IMS) is a powerful technique for analyzing the spatial distribution of a wide range of biomolecules []. Phospholipids are integral structural and regulatory components of biological membranes, important in cell signaling pathways, and they serve as precursors to many active biomolecules []. Recently, analysis of phospholipids (PLs) by imaging mass spectrometry has been reported []. The study of the distribution of these biomolecules can provide critical insight into relevant biological processes in both healthy and diseased tissue samples.
Common methods of depositing matrix for MALDI imaging include robotic spotting [], electrospray deposition [], and spray-coating with an airbrush []. Robotic spotting usually yields high signal quality and very reproducible results, but the image resolution is limited to the size and spacing of the matrix spots. Washing the tissue with ethanol helps to prevent the spreading of the matrix spots, but such a wash cannot be used when analyzing phospholipids. Spray-coating can cause analyte delocalization if the tissue becomes too wet during the application. Also, the matrix crystal size and the homogeneity of the coating can vary significantly from operator to operator. Recently, a protocol using sublimation for matrix deposition has been reported [] that gives a homogeneous coating of matrix essential for obtaining high-resolution phospholipid images from tissue. The sublimation apparatus is relatively simple and is commercially available.
We describe a new procedure that involves dry-coating matrix on a tissue section using finely ground crystals of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) filtered through a 20-μm sieve. Positive ionization mode ion images were acquired at 30- to 100-μm lateral resolution using a MALDI TOF mass spectrometer. The results show that the dry matrix deposition protocol allows reproducible high-resolution phospholipid images to be obtained.
2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) was purchased from Acros Organics (Morris Plains, NJ, USA) and ground for 15 min using a mortar and a pestle, yielding crystals between 1 and 40 μm in diameter. The DHB solution used for the spray-coated comparison experiments was prepared at a concentration of 40 mg/mL using 1:1 ethanol:water solvent. The ethanol was HPLC grade and purchased from Fisher Scientific (Fairlawn, NJ, USA).
Fresh frozen mouse brain samples were used for the imaging experiments. The tissue samples were cut into 12-μm-thick sagittal sections using a cryostat (Leica CM3050 S) and then thaw-mounted onto gold-coated MALDI plates. The sections were allowed to dry in a vacuum desiccator for 10 min before matrix application. A serial section was cut and mounted on a glass slide and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for anatomical visualization. A 20-μm stainless steel sieve, a full-height sieve receiving pan, and a sieve cover were purchased from Hogentogler & Co., Inc. (Columbia, MD, USA). The MALDI plate was attached to the bottom of the receiving pan with double-sided tape. A layer of the finely ground DHB was then disbursed over the sieve mesh using a small brush. The sieve was covered and shaken until a uniform DHB layer was deposited over the tissue sections. Excess matrix was removed by briefly directing a burst of clean compressed gas (MicroDuster III, CleanTex, Nanuet, NY, USA) toward the plate from a distance of 20 cm. The matrix application process was repeated three times for optimal coverage and homogeneity. The matrix coverage and crystals sizes were measured with an Olympus BX50 microscope.
For comparison, serial sections were prepared using a manual spray-coating technique. A TLC nebulizer (Kontes, Vineland, NJ, USA) with nitrogen gas at 3 psi was used to spray-coat the tissue sections. The DHB solution was repetitively sprayed across the MALDI plate from a distance of 20 cm, allowing 45 s of drying time between the passes, until a uniform matrix coating was achieved on the tissue section.
Mouse brain tissue sections were imaged in the positive ionization mode with an UltraFlex II MALDI TOF-TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) in reflector mode, accumulating 150 laser shots per position at a 100-Hz laser frequency over m/z range of 420 to 1200. The dry-coated images were acquired at 100 × 100-, 40 × 50-, and 30 × 35-μm raster step sizes using the oversampling technique []. The spray-coated sections were imaged at a 100-μm step size. The laser intensity was adjusted before each imaging experiment to yield optimal results; generally, the dry-coated sections required 15–30% greater laser fluence than the spray-coated sections. The images were created, normalized, and visualized using FlexImaging software.
We have assessed the effectiveness of the solvent-free matrix dry-coating procedure for applications involving phospholipid imaging. The DHB crystal size and homogeneity of the matrix coverage were determined by optical microscopy. To control the crystal size deposited onto the tissue sections, we used a 20-μm sieve filter, resulting in a matrix coating consisting of crystals of 1–20 μm long. The crystal size distribution did not vary much between operators. Figure 1 shows a DHB-coated sagittal mouse brain section and an optical microscope image of the matrix coating on tissue at a magnification of ×4. The matrix coating is relatively uniform, with little clustering of the crystals.
Figure 2 shows a comparison between the solvent-free matrix dry-coating technique described here and a spray-coating method on serial sagittal mouse brain sections. Both sections were imaged at 100-μm lateral resolution. The average full-scan phospholipid signal obtained with each method as well as overlaid ion images of the potassium salt of phosphatidylcholine (PC) 36:1 at m/z 826 and PC 40:6 at m/z 872 are shown as examples in Figure 2. The MS/MS spectrum of the m/z 826 peak, obtained directly from the dry-coated brain section, is also given. It shows the characteristic phosphocholine signal at m/z 184 and the neutral loss of the choline head group (−59 Da) as well as a potassium cyclophosphane peak at m/z 163. A consecutive MALDI spectrum acquired with a Fourier transform mass spectrometer (FTMS) showed a single peak at m/z 826.5723. The accurate mass obtained with the FTMS supports the identification of the species as PC 36:1 (calculated m/z 826.5728). While keeping the sample preparation steps simple and minimizing analyte delocalization, the dry-coating method produced high-quality molecular images showing signal intensity and phospholipid localization similar to those obtained from the spray-coated tissue section.
From each dry-coated imaging experiment, dozens of ion images can be generated that clearly differentiate the anatomical structures of the brain. Several phospholipid images are shown in Figure 3. Some of the regions of the brain that were found to differentially express specific phospholipid distributions are identified in the H&E-stained serial section of the sagittal mouse brain. For example, the peak at m/z 741, which corresponds to potassium salt of sphingomyelin (SM 16:0), was found localized to the fourth and lateral ventricles. MS/MS analyses performed on the dry-coated sections supported the identifications of the phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin species indicated in Figure 3. The identifications were confirmed by accurate mass measurements obtained directly from the dry-coated sections using FTMS.
Dry-coating can be used for high-resolution MALDI imaging, which is illustrated in Figure 4. Two sagittal mouse brain sections were dry-coated and the cerebellum regions were imaged at 40 × 50- and 30 × 35-μm lateral resolutions. A serial section was stained with H&E. The overlaid phospholipid images show the localization of PC 40:6 (m/z 872 in light blue), PC 36:1 and PC 38:4 (m/z 826 and 810 in red), and PC 38:6 (m/z 844 in green) in the cerebellar cortex, nucleus, and granule cell layer, respectively.
In conclusion, the solvent-free matrix dry-coating approach for phospholipid analysis and imaging can be an attractive alternative to methods that require the matrix to be dissolved in a solvent. With the dry-coating method, there is no significant analyte delocalization. Optimal matrix coverage is achieved when the tissue section is dried in a desiccator for no more than 10 to 15 min before dry-coating, suggesting that some moisture on the tissue aids microscale dissolvation of the surface layers of the matrix crystals. The spatial resolution of the image is limited by the size of the focused laser spot, the size of the individual matrix crystals, and percentage matrix coverage on tissue that, for the experiments reported here, was greater than 80%. The dry-coating procedure is a simple and fast method of producing a homogeneous matrix coating, which in turn can give high-quality phospholipid molecular images.