Phenolic compounds are considered major environmental risks, being present in industrial effluents and as conversion products from natural and synthetic chemicals, including pesticides . Owing to their toxicity, both the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the European Union (EU) have included some phenols, mainly nitrophenols and chlorophenols, in their lists of priority pollutants. The EU legislation requirement is that the maximum admissible concentration of phenols in drinking water should be 0.5 ng/mL for the total phenols and 0.1 ng/mL for an individual compound . On this basis, the determination of this class of compounds in the environment is of great importance.
In an analytical process, it is usually vital to separate the analytes from the matrix, including interfering substances. In fact one of the main objectives of sample preparation is clean-up which is particularly important for complex matrices (e.g. biological samples and in many cases, environmental samples as well). Another aim of sample preparation is enrichment of the analytes to achieve low limits of detection (LODs). There must also be compatibility between the solvent in the final extract and the analytical method.
Liquid–liquid extraction (LLE) is a classical extraction method , which has been, and continues to be, widely used. There are some disadvantages of this method: it is laborious and time consuming. Emulsion formation and precipitation, use of large amount of highly purified (and therefore expensive) solvents along with generation of potentially toxic laboratory waste are the other drawbacks of this method.
Solid-phase extraction (SPE) is another popular technique. It utilizes a sorbent and consumes lower amounts of solvent. This method has been successfully used for the extraction of chlorophenols from environmental samples . Although there is the potential of automation with SPE, it is expensive. During the last two decades much effort has been focused on developing miniaturized sample preparation techniques to address most of the aforementioned disadvantages of conventional procedures like LLE and SPE.
Solid-phase microextraction (SPME) is a well-established solventless sampling and sample preparation technique. This method has been successfully applied to the analysis of different types of environmental contaminants and pollutants such as chlorophenols . SPME effectively overcomes the difficulties of conventional extraction methods by eliminating the use of organic solvents and allowing sample extraction and preconcentration to be performed in a single step. This technique is predominantly performed on commercially available SPME fibers, which are often prepared by physical or chemical deposition of a polymeric coating on the surface of a fused silica fiber. As commercially available fibers are often fragile, care should be taken during the extraction and desorption processes. In most instances, a rather long extraction time is needed with SPME.
Miniaturization of liquid extraction approaches has led to the development of liquid-phase microextraction (LPME). The concept of LPME in its original form hinged upon the suspension of an organic solvent microdrop at the tip of a microsyringe needle . This drop-based method is used in both two-phase and three-phase systems , whereby analytes in aqueous samples are extracted, respectively, into a drop of water-immiscible organic solvent, or through a thin layer of organic solvent resting on the top of the sample into an aqueous drop. LPME creates excellent clean-up and uses only a few microliters of solvent. Despite all the benefits of this design, drop-based LPME (more commonly known as single-drop microextraction) is not a very robust system due to the problems related to the instability of the microdrop. This is especially obvious when high stirring rate is involved during the extraction process. Moreover, complex sample matrices have detrimental effects on the stability of the solvent drop. One way to address this issue is to hold the extractant solvent in the wall pores and channel of a hollow fiber membrane that acts as a protective sheath . The analytes are extracted from an aqueous sample, through an organic solvent immobilized in the porous wall of the polypropylene hollow fiber (i.e. supported liquid membrane (SLM)), and into an aqueous acceptor solution in the fiber channel. This procedure is known as liquid–liquid–liquid microextraction (LLLME) or three-phase hollow fiber LPME. The immobilized SLM in the wall pores and organic solvent or solution in the channel of the fiber obviates instability problems in LPME as described above. Furthermore, using the disposable hollow fiber membranes minimizes, if not eliminates, carryover effects.
Electro membrane extraction (EME) is an extraction technique that was first introduced by Pedersen-Bjergaard and Rasmussen . This method is similar to LLLME except that voltage is applied across the layer of organic solvent in the hollow fiber wall pores, to drive the analytes into the receiving (acceptor) phase in the fiber channel. Published reports have shown that this method of extraction could act as a fast and selective technique for isolating charged analytes from complicated sample matrices. Up to now, most of the reported EME work has been focused on the determination of drugs in biological samples. Following the successful application of EME in environmental studies , in this work, the electrokinetic migration of chlorophenols across a SLM was investigated. Four chlorophenols were selected for this study and different parameters affecting EME of these compounds from seawater samples were optimized via a univariate approach.
4-Chlorophenol (4CP), 2,4-dichlorophenol (24DCP), nitrophenyl octyl ether (NPOE) and cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) were all obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (Milwaukee, WI, USA). 2,4,6-Trichlorophenol (246TCP) and pentachlorophenol (PCP) were purchased from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). High performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC)-grade methanol and acetonitrile were bought from Tedia Company (Fairfield, OH, USA). Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK), 1-butanol, 1-hexanol, 1-octanol and hydrochloric acid were bought from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Benzyl alcohol was obtained from Alfa Aesar (Karlsruhre, Germany) while toluene was from Fisher Scientific (Loughborough, UK). Phosphoric acid was purchased from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy). Sodium chloride (NaCl) was from Goodrich Chemical Enterprise (Singapore). Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was acquired from Chemicon (Temecula, CA, USA). Ultrapure water was prepared on a Nanopure water purification system (Barnstead, Dubuque, IA, USA).
All standard solutions of the analytes were prepared in methanol at a concentration of 10,000 μg/mL. They were diluted with methanol for the EME experiments.
A Shimadzu (Kyoto, Japan) HPLC system, including LC-20AD binary pumps, a DGU-20A5 degasser, a dynamic mixing chamber and an SPD-20A ultraviolet/visible (UV/vis) detector, was used for separation and determination of the analytes. The separation was performed on a 250 mm × 4.6 mm I.D., 5 μm, Phenomenax HyperClone C18 column (Torrance, CA, USA). The mobile phase consisted of acetonitrile and water (pH 3). Phosphoric acid was used to adjust the pH of the mobile phase. Direct sample introduction was carried out using a Rheodyne six-port switching valve (Rohnert Park, CA, USA) with a 20 μL loop. Chromatographic separations were performed using isocratic elution with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min for each pump while detection was carried out at a wavelength of 220 nm. The chromatographic data were collected and recorded using LCsolution version 1.22 software from Shimadzu.
A multi-channel electrophoresis power supply, MCE-PS468, from CE Resources (Singapore) with programmable voltage was used as a direct current (d.c.) source.
The EME set-up used for electromigration of analytes across the SLM is shown in Fig. 1 . Two platinum wires (0.1 mm diameter) were used as electrodes and inserted in the donor (negative electrode) and acceptor (positive electrode) solutions.
The membrane bag was made from Accurel 2E HF (R/P) polypropylene hollow fiber membrane sheet (157 μm thickness × 0.2 μm pore size) supplied by Membrana (Wuppertal, Germany). The membrane bag was prepared in definite dimensions (for example, 1.4 cm × 2.2 cm (width × height), with an opening along the shorter dimension).
To seal the open ends, a plastic bag heat-sealing device was used. The acceptor solution was introduced to the bag through the single open end. The latter was then immersed in an organic solvent (for ca. 5 s) in order to fill the wall pores, forming the SLM. The pK a values of 4CP, 24DCP, 246TCP and PCP are 8.81, 7.81, 6.30 and 5.55, respectively. According to the basic principles of EME and the given pK a values, a 3 mL donor solution, adjusted to pH 12 and spiked with 5 μg/mL of each chlorophenol, was first considered for the EME experiments. 100 μL NaOH solution at pH 12 was used as the acceptor solution. Other initial conditions included an extraction time of 5 min, voltage of 50 V and stirring rate of 700 rpm.
To investigate the extraction efficiency and enrichment, various parameters surmised to be influential to extraction, including the type of SLM, acceptor and donor phase pH, sample and acceptor volume, stirring rate, applied voltage, extraction time, and salt addition were optimized via a univariate approach. The enrichment factor (EF) was calculated according to the following equation: EF=Ca,finalCa,initial where C a,final is the final concentration of analyte in the acceptor phase, and C a,initial is the initial analyte concentration within the sample.
There are specific requirements for a solvent to be used as an SLM in EME. The distribution tendency of the analytes into the SLM should be higher than that in aquatic media to allow mass transfer of the analytes into acceptor phase via the SLM. The extraction procedure could also be tuned to achieve enhancement of the selectivity and good clean-up by utilizing different solvents in combination with various modifiers or coextractants. Furthermore, the solvent should be immiscible in water to avoid losses from the hollow fiber membrane wall pores and dissolution in the sample during stirring. These criteria are similar to those used in LLE or LPME, except that in the present case, the analytes are ionic. Particularly in EME, the sample solution, SLM and acceptor phase should complete an electrical circuit. Thus the solvent should have sufficient electrical conductivity, so as to allow electrokinetic migration of compounds across the SLM into the acceptor phase and to prevent an increase in the current flow in the system.
Considering all these criteria, alcohols like 1-butanol, 1-hexanol, 1-octanol, benzyl alcohol along with MEK, NPOE and toluene were evaluated . Toluene and NPOE were found to be unsuitable for EME of chlorophenols as the recoveries obtained were very low. In addition the recovery results obtained with toluene were inconsistent. This could be due to its relatively moderate volatility and low density. All the rest of the solvents were observed to give very similar performance, except that 1-octanol showed a special selectivity for the extraction of PCP. This could be attributed to the compatibility of 1-octanol with the more hydrophobic PCP, with respect to its polarity. This is similar to the case in LLE, where the solvent is the main determinative factor affecting selectivity. While 1-octanol was found to be a suitable and more selective solvent for the EME of PCP, it did not, however, fare as well for 24DCP; the extraction for this compound was very low.
It has been found that addition of hydrophobic ion-pair reagents to SLM would enable better phase transfer and electrokinetic migration of analytes . This is because ion-pair reagents enhance the solubility of the protonated analytes, which aids in the permeation of the analytes at the interface between the sample and SLM. To investigate this effect, 3% CTAB in 1-octanol was used as the SLM. For 4CP, 24DCP and 246TCP, there was slight improvement in recovery. For PCP, being a more hydrophobic compound, a decrease in recovery was observed. The strong interaction of the ion-pair PCP complex with the organic phase may be responsible for this behavior. It was obvious that use of an ion-pair reagent in this work gives variable results, and thus does not provide any general guidance on the trends of extraction for all the analytes considered.
In order to perform this study, vials with 2 and 1.5 cm I.D. were used for EME lasting 5 min. To avoid complications, our studies focused on the comparison between vials of similar I.D. but containing different sample volumes. Hence comparisons were performed between the sample volumes of 23 and 10 mL, using vials of 2 cm I.D. and between sample volumes of 2 and 3 mL, using vials with 1.5 cm I.D. Experiments with sample volume of 10 mL showed slightly better percentage recovery of analytes than those with volumes of 23 mL. There was no significant difference in recovery between sample volumes of 2 and 3 mL. However, the decrease in the sample volume from 10 mL (2 cm I.D. vial) to 3 mL (1.5 cm I.D. vial) caused a significant increase in recovery. This could be related to the shortened migration distance of analytes towards the membrane. The improvement in recovery was most prominent for PCP, which possesses the highest molecular weight among the analytes. Since migration velocity depends on the charge to size ratio, this decline in migration distance will have a more obvious effect on PCP.
To continue our study based on sample volume of 1 mL, a vial with 0.9 cm I.D. was employed and the width of the membrane bag was changed from 1.4 to 0.6 cm. By lowering the sample volume to 1 mL, there was an insignificant decrease in recovery for 4CP and 24DCP, while for 246TCP, there was a slight increase in recovery. For PCP, an almost two-fold enhancement was observed. Mass transfer in this system is accomplished by electrokinetic migration and convection. Since the electric field strength is stronger and convection is also more effective in a much smaller sample compartment, an increase in recovery for all compounds was expected. However, our observation was that stronger electrical field mainly affected compounds with lower mobilities (i.e. 246TCP and PCP). The slight decrease in recovery for 4CP and 24DCP could have resulted from factors associated with this observation which somewhat suppressed the transfer of these analytes.
Finally an amount of 1 mL of sample was used for further experiments.
For the following step of optimization, the pH of both donor and acceptor phases were considered. For this purpose, different amounts of hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were employed to prepare donor solutions with different pH values (2, 4, 10, 12). Deionized water at pH 7.2 was used as well. The results are shown in Fig. 2a. Increasing degree of ionization of the phenols (reflecting the increase in pH of the donor solutions) led to improvement in electrokinetic migration. The completely ionized forms of analytes could be achieved when the pH value exceeded the pK a values of the target compounds. As such, the best extraction results were achieved at pH 12, as indicated by Fig. 2a.
Corresponding experiments were performed to investigate the effect of pH in the acceptor solution. The results are summarized in Fig. 2b.
The electrolytic reactions taking place in the donor and acceptor solutions include the following:
Donor solution (negative electrode): 2H+ + 2e− → H2
Acceptor solution (positive electrode): H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e−
These reactions demonstrate the dependency of extraction recovery on the pH of the acceptor phase as well. The selected pH should be sufficiently high to maintain analytes in the ionized forms and prevent them from being re-extracted into the organic phase.
Since electrolysis of water at the anode in the acceptor phase leads to the formation of hydronium ions, a gradual decrease of pH during extraction could occur . Thus, a pH of 12 was considered to be most suitable.
From previous experiments, it was found that 100 μL of 0.01 M NaOH acceptor solution might not be the most suitable volume. Firstly, occasional and inadvertent leakage of the acceptor solution from the membrane bag would occur. Secondly, usage of lesser amount of this phase should be favorable to prevent the dilution of analytes. As such, smaller volumes of the acceptor phase (20, 35, 50, 70 and 100 μL) with NaOH concentration maintained at 0.01 M were used to investigate the optimal acceptor phase volume. The results are summarized in Fig. 3 . With decreasing amount of acceptor solution used, the enrichment of PCP became more prominent. For other analytes, there was only negligible or slight improvement in their enrichments.
More effective enrichment was expected with further lowering of the acceptor phase volume; however, it was not experimentally favorable to work with volumes lower than 20 μL. This is due to this fact that the electrodes could not be placed in proper contact with the minute amount of acceptor solution, and the amount was also too little to be collected reliably at the end of the extractions. Therefore, it was decided to use 20 μL as the acceptor solution volume for practical reasons.
Stirring is essential in most diffusion-based microextraction techniques to ensure proper mixing of the sample so that the thickness of the boundary layer at the interface between the sample solution and the SLM is reduced. The importance of stirring rate in EME had also been highlighted in recent papers . It was observed that analyte recovery could be increased with increasing stirring rate. Our investigations gave similar results. At the maximum stirring rate, i.e. 1250 rpm, highest recovery was obtained. Thus, a stirring rate of 1250 rpm was chosen for the rest of the experiments.
The main mass transfer mechanism in EME is the electrokinetic migration of the analytes across the SLM into the acceptor solution, and this is greatly dependent on the applied voltage. In a recent paper, Kjelsen et al. described how the flux of analytes was driven by the electric potential applied across a SLM . A series of experiments with extraction voltages ranging from 0 to 200 V were conducted. In a totally quiescent assembly (0 V), the target analytes were not extracted at all (with stirring), but with the application of merely 10 V, significant amounts of analytes were recovered, particularly for PCP. A recent report on using voltage to extract nerve agent degradation products across a membrane also showed that without application of voltage, no extraction took place . The prominent effect of voltage confirmed that the potential difference between the electrodes was the main driving force in EME. However, the recoveries decreased when higher voltages were supplied. It is worth mentioning that applying voltage could lead to lower pH in acceptor solution due to the formation of hydronium ions. Therefore with a decrease in the acceptor phase pH, the distribution of analytes into the organic SLM could increase, accounting for the decline in recoveries when >10 V was applied . Our results (Fig. 4 ) showed that a low voltage of 10 V was sufficient to extract PCP. This presents a possibility to utilize a common dry cell battery for the selective EME of PCP, providing another advantage of this approach specific to the determination of this particular chlorophenol.
Preliminary experiments with extraction time of 5 min showed effective extraction of the analytes. In order to investigate the electrokinetic migration of these chlorophenols over time, the extraction time was varied from 1 to 30 min. As demonstrated in Fig. 5 , the amount of PCP extracted increased from 1 to 10 min but a clear reduction in the signal intensity could be observed after 10 min. A similar result was obtained for 246TCP, while for 4CP and 24DCP, a decline was observed after 5 min. Such a phenomenon was most probably due to the back extraction of analytes into the organic SLM, which was probably triggered by the decrease in pH of the acceptor solution after these times. The extraction was, therefore, performed in 10 min.
Addition of NaCl in the range of 0–30% was investigated. As the percentage of salt was increased, the recovery of analytes was reduced. This could be related to the migration of chloride, as a major competitor, along with the ionic species. According to a previous study , the presence of high content of ionic substances causes an increase in the value of the ion balance (χ) in the system, which in turn decreases the flux of analytes across the SLM. Our observations are in full agreement with the study. Thus, migration of the analytes would be more efficient in the absence of salt.
To generate comparable data, three-phase LPME extraction was carried out with the same apparatus and extraction conditions, except for the use of electrodes and power supply. The composition of the sample solution was also different. In EME, the sample solution was made alkaline to ensure that ionization of the acidic analytes could occur easily; this was necessary to promote electrokinetic migration in the system. For LPME, the sample solution was prepared in 0.01 M HCl to maintain the neutrality of the analytes and promote their distribution into the organic SLM. To perform LPME, briefly an amount of 1 mL of sample solution, already adjusted to pH 2, was first filled into a 1.5 mL vial and spiked with the analytes of interest at a concentration level of 5 μg/mL. A 20 μL volume of a solution with pH 12 was placed into the membrane bag as the acceptor phase (the same as for EME). The bag was then immersed in 1-octanol for some seconds, to fill the pores of the membrane wall. It was then dabbed gently with lint-free tissue paper to remove excess 1-octanol. Subsequently, the bag was suspended in the sample solution. During extraction, the sample solution was agitated at 1250 rpm with a magnetic stirrer. After 10 min, the acceptor solution was collected in a 100 μL micro-vial and 10 μL of the extractant was injected into the HPLC-UV system.
Although the experiments were similar in terms of the apparatus required, the extraction principle is different; in LPME, mass transfer is based on passive diffusion instead of electrokinetic migration that is found in EME .
The chromatograms in Fig. 6 suggest that the developed EME procedure is capable of extracting and enriching PCP specifically; for the other chlorophenols, however, LPME provided better extraction. PCP was not as effectively extracted using LPME but, interestingly, its extraction was drastically improved with EME. This result demonstrates that electrical potential may be much more efficient than pH gradients in driving extractions of large charged hydrophobic compounds across an SLM. The finding shows that EME may be more attractive for the selective isolation of higher molecular mass and more hydrophobic compounds.
Considering the optimized EME parameters, quantitative analysis was evaluated only for the determination of PCP in spiked distilled water samples. An enrichment factor of 23 along with an acceptable sample clean-up was obtained. As Table 1 summarizes, a linear range of 0.5–1000 ng/mL (y = 1904x + 7653) and an excellent r 2 (coefficient of estimation) value of 0.999 were obtained. Furthermore, the precision of the method was determined by performing six consecutive extractions from an aqueous solution. The standard deviation of the peak areas of PCP at a concentration level of 0.5 ng/mL was found to be 6.8%. Limits of detection and quantification, based on a signal-to-noise ratio of 3 and 10, were found to be 0.1 and 0.4 ng/mL, respectively.
Table 1 also illustrates some analytical data obtained from other LPME-based methods and one recent SPME method used for the determination of PCP. Comparison of EME data with those obtained from these techniques demonstrates that electrokinetic migration provides a very efficient mechanism. This methodology not only provides sufficient and acceptable sensitivity in a short time scale, but it could also be used with a small amount of sample without any derivatization needed.
To evaluate the applicability of the proposed method for PCP extraction, experiments were performed on seawater samples collected from a coastal location. The seawater sample was first extracted using the developed method. Since no PCP was found in this sample, the latter was spiked with this analyte at a concentration level of 1 ng/mL, and analysis was carried out as before. The chromatograms of extracts from unspiked and spiked seawater samples are shown in Fig. 7 . It is worth mentioning that the HPLC conditions were altered to shorten the run time since only one analyte was considered. Although there were impurity peaks due to organic substances present in the seawater, a relative recovery of 74% was achieved for PCP at a spiked level of 1 ng/mL, demonstrating the feasibility of using EME-HPLC for selective PCP determination in genuine environmental aqueous matrices.
Our investigation on the EME of chlorophenols revealed that the comparatively higher molecular weight and more hydrophobic compounds are more amenable to be isolated via this electrokinetic-based technique. Direct comparison of these results with those obtained by other microextraction approaches shows that the proposed technique exhibits particular selectivity towards PCP, which is the most non-polar compound amongst the chlorophenols considered. Comparing with the corresponding three-phase LPME method, the enrichment of PCP was found to be four times greater with merely 10 min of extraction time. The optimized voltage for extraction was only 10 V, which allows the use of a common dry cell battery for potential field applications. The linearity, reproducibility and detection limits obtained using this method are comparable to those achieved by other techniques.
Although more research is required for better understanding of the electrokinetic extraction of these analytes across a SLM, the developed technique has definitely presented several advantages like simplicity, short analysis time, low cost, ease of operation, low consumption of solvent and no requirement of derivatization. Lastly, the feasibility of the method to extract PCP selectively was demonstrated successfully for a spiked genuine seawater sample.