Nanosized materials have attracted widespread attention for their special features different from bulk materials since 1990s. Because of their high activity, good selectivity and small size, chemical sensors based on nanosized materials have been developed rapidly. For example, the individual semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT)-based chemical sensors capable of detecting small concentrations of gas molecules have been realized . Boron-doped silicon nanowire nanosensors have showed highly sensitive and selective detection of biological and chemical species . Palladium mesowire arrays for detection of hydrogen has been described based upon resistivity changes caused by the changes in the structure of the wire itself .
Sensing gas molecules is critical to industry monitoring, control of chemical processes, medical applications, environmental processes, and so on. The detection and quantification of ethanol, for instance, with high sensitivity and selectivity are required in many different fields. One of the important applications is to aid police in apprehending drink-driving offenders as a breath analyzer. Blood ethanol concentration can also be determined from its concentration in breath, a blood/breath alcohol partition ratio of 2000 having been widely adopted . In certain industry areas, such as fermentation and distillation, the ethanol vapor concentration can reach toxic levels, causing inflammation of the nasal mucous membrane and conjunctiva, irritation of the skin. The maximum permitted concentration of ethanol vapor in the work place as defined by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) is 1000 ppm.
An efficient way is therefore required for measuring gaseous substances, including ethanol vapor, with high sensitivity and selectivity. The alcohol sensors based on nanosized materials have been studied extensively by using electrochemical methods. Sensor materials including tin oxides , rare earth oxides and other ethanol-sensing semiconducting materials have been widely investigated. However, these sensors are also sensitive to some foreign substances, such as hydrocarbon, gasoline, ammonia and hydrogen, which unfortunately interfere with the alcohol detection. In addition, more and more attention was paid to gas sensors based on the optical properties of nanosized materials. For instance, porous-silicon ethanol sensor was developed based on the shift of the Fabry–Pérot fringes by using laser interferometry method . Quantitative detection utilizing the quenching of photoluminescence of porous-silicon by NOx, SO2 and organic compounds has been developed . Chemiluminescence (CL) generated on the surface of nanosized materials was firstly observed during the mixture of porous-silicon and nitric acid , but no further analytical application based on the phenomenon has been developed. In recent years, Nakagawa and coworkers observed CL phenomena during the catalytic oxidation of organic vapors on the bulk materials of γ-aluminum oxide (γ-Al2O3) and γ-Al2O3 activated by Dy3+ . However, their research work utilizing this kind of luminescence was limited to the two bulk solids. Strong CL observed from organic gases oxidized on six nanosized materials was firstly reported in our previous work . The details regarding analytical characteristics of the sensors were not involved in the paper since it is the very preliminary work. The aim of this paper was to evaluate the potentials of this new type of sensor based on nanosized SrCO3 material for the detection of ethanol by means of sensitivity, selectivity and lifetime as evaluation parameters. Nanosized SrCO3 was selected because this material showed excellent analytical characteristics over other five materials.
The possible mechanism of CL from the catalytic oxidation of ethanol on SrCO3 has been studied in the paper by using gas chromatography (GC). As we know, the mechanism of gas-phase CL from the oxidation of some organic and inorganic gases by O3 has been studied intensively, such as NO+O3, SO+O3, unsaturated hydrocarbons + O3, etc. , which has been reviewed in a book . However, the CL mechanism about gases oxidized on solid catalysts was little studied except for several reports . Only one mechanism mode of CL from the catalytic oxidation of ethanol on bulk material of γ-Al2O3 was proposed, which attributed CL species to formaldehyde produced by the oxidation of ethylene that originated from ethanol . The following Eqs. (1) and (2) show the course of ethanol oxidation on γ-Al2O3 resulted in the same CL phenomenon that has been observed during the oxidation of ethylene by O3 : C2H5OH→C2H4+H2O 3C2H4+3O2→6HCHO+hν In this paper, however, CL can be found not only during the course of ethylene oxidation, but also from the oxidation of acetaldehyde that is another intermediate of the ethanol oxidation on SrCO3. According to the different CL phenomena not observed before and the results from GC experiments, the possible mechanism about the reaction of ethanol oxidation resulted in CL is discussed.
The CL detection system consists of a SrCO3 sensor and a commercial optical detector. Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the SrCO3 sensor. It can be seen that a cylindrical ceramic heater of 5 mm diameter was put in a quartz tube of 12 mm inner diameter. This ceramic heater was operated at required temperature by using an electric wire inserted into the ceramic tube. Outside of the ceramic tube, a 0.5 mm layer of SrCO3 powder was sintered on the surface. The sample gas can flow only through the outside of ceramic heater because this ceramic tube is solid. The main reaction between sensor substrate and sample molecules occurred on the surface of nanosized SrCO3 powder. The CL intensity at a certain wavelength was measured with a BPCL Ultra Weak Chemiluminescence Analyzer (made by Biophysics Institute of Chinese Academy of Science in China) through variable optical filters. The SrCO3 sensor was heated at 500 °C for 30 min in air to avoid the influence of previous absorbates at the beginning of each series of experiments.
A simple chemical precipitation method for the synthesis of nanosized SrCO3 was developed as follows: 0.1 M SrCl2 solution and 0.1 M Na2CO3 solution were firstly cooled to 2 °C. Then the Na2CO3 solution was rapidly added into the stirring SrCl2 solution at the ratios of 1:1. Immediately, the precipitation was filtered and washed with di-ionized water for five times. All of the chemicals used in the experiment were of analytical grade.
The topography and particle size of SrCO3 were measured using a Hitachi H-800 Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The accelerating voltage of electron beam was 200 kV. Fig. 2 shows that the grain size of SrCO3 is about 60–70 nm. X-ray power diffraction (XRD) experiment was carried out in Rigaku DMAX-2400 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. From Fig. 3 , we can find that these peaks are attributed to the pure strontianite-type crystal according to the XRD standard spectrum of SrCO3 crystal. The average crystal sizes can be determined from the XRD pattern parameters according to the Scherrer equation: D C=K λ/β cos θ, where D C is the average crystal size, K is the Scherrer constant equal to 0.89, λ is the X-ray wavelength equal to 0.1542 nm, β is the full width at half-maximum and θ is the diffraction angle. The average size of SrCO3 crystal synthesized in this article is about 25 nm.
In order to investigate the catalytic reaction processes that involve CL emission, GC experiments were carried out to identify the intermediates from the catalytic oxidation of ethanol on SrCO3. The SP-502 GC instrument with a flame ionization detector (FID detector, made in Lunan Chemical Engineering & Instrument Company of P.R.C., equipped with a GDX403 column, size 1.5 m×4 mm) was directly coupled to the CL detection system mentioned earlier for the rapid determination of intermediates from the ethanol oxidation. Products were identified by comparison of their retention time to that of the standard compounds from Huayuan Gas Cooperation in Beijing. The conditions for GC experiments were as follows: temperature of spray chamber operated at 120 °C, column temperature operated at 100 °C, pressure of carrier gas of Ar kept at 0.38 MPa.
The CL response profile of ethanol was studied by the injection of ethanol vapor with different concentrations into the carrier gas with a flow rate of 150 ml/min. Fig. 4 shows the CL response profiles of 70 ml ethanol vapor on the surface of nanosized SrCO3 at 380 °C with a bandpass filter of 425 nm. Curves 1–3 denote the results for different concentrations of 750, 1500 and 2250 ppm, respectively. The CL signal increased sharply by about three orders of magnitude after ethanol vapor was introduced. There is a systematic increase of CL intensity with the increasing ethanol concentration. Fig. 4 also shows that the peaks of each curve appear at 7 s after sample injection, which means rapid response of this sensor to ethanol, and the profiles are similar to each other. The half decay time of CL intensity of each curve is about 30 s. The decay is related to the luminescent product and the dead volume of the used instrument.
Fig. 5 shows the CL spectra emitted from the SrCO3 sensor during the process of catalytic oxidation of ethanol vapor at the flow rate of 150 ml/min. The temperature corresponding to curves 1–3 is 400, 380 and 350 °C, respectively. It can be seen that the profile of each curves in the figure are similar and each curves have the same peak at around 425, 460 and 530 nm, which means the same luminescent species was produced at different temperatures. But with the increasing of sensor temperature, the CL peak at 530 nm becomes higher than other two. This is to say, CL peak positions are independent of the tested temperatures that will affect the relative CL intensity.
As shown in Fig. 6 , the relative S/N (signal to background noise) ratios versus wavelength at three different temperatures are established. The profiles of curves 1–3 are similar to each other. It shows that there are also three peaks at the same positions with Fig. 5. The position of the highest peak is at 425 nm independent of temperature, which is different from Fig. 5. In fact, the background and noise signal at longer wavelength are much higher than those at short wavelength because of the incandescence of ceramic heater at high temperature. Although the CL signal is much higher at 530 nm than other wavelengths at 400 °C as shown in Fig. 5, the S/N value at 530 nm is still lower than that at 425 and 460 nm. From Fig. 6, the profiles of S/N ratios to wavelength are little affected by the tested temperatures. So, the wavelength of 425 nm is chosen for the further study of analytical characteristics.
Temperature dependence of the CL intensity of 500 ppm ethanol was measured under the bandpass of 425 nm and at the flow rate of 150 ml/min. Fig. 7 denotes that the CL signal increases with the increase in temperature from 350 to 470 °C. It can be attributed to the higher conversion of ethanol on SrCO3 in high temperature, which will be explained later in the paper. However, according to the values of S/N versus temperature, the maximum value of S/N could be obtained when the sensor temperature is 380 °C; under or above the temperature causes decrease in the value of S/N. The reason is probably that the noise signal also increases with the temperature increasing, and even increases faster than the CL intensity at higher temperature. Therefore, the temperature of 380 °C was selected for the further work in the paper.
The flow rate dependence of the CL intensity at 425 nm was measured at 380 °C from 50 to 350 ml/min as illustrated in Fig. 8 . The CL intensity of 500 ppm ethanol increases with an increase in the flow rate, and it saturates above a certain flow rate F (280 ml/min). This directly shows that the catalytic oxidation process that produces the luminescent intermediates is under a diffusion controlled condition at flow rate below F, and is under a reaction controlled condition at flow rate above F. For the further analysis of the proposed method in the paper, the flow rate of 300 ml/min was selected.
Under the selected conditions described earlier for the performance of the proposed method, the calibration curve of CL intensity versus ethanol vapor concentration was linear in the range of 6–3750 ppm with a detection limit (3σ) of 2.1 ppm, as shown in Fig. 9 . The line regression equation is described by lg I=1.07×lg C+1.37 (r=0.998, n=8, ‘r’ is the relative coefficient, and ‘n’ represents that eight ethanol concentrations were tested in the experiment), where I is the CL intensity and C is the concentration of ethanol vapor. Relative standard deviations (RSD, n=8) were 3.08%, 2.82% and 1.30% for 30, 300 and 3000 ppm ethanol vapor, respectively.
Foreign substances, such as gasoline, ammonia, hydrocarbons (cigarette smoke) and hydrogen, sometimes would unfortunately interfere with the alcohol measurements. For example, some semiconductor oxide sensors based on the change in electrical resistance of substrate materials are sensitive to ethanol, but they are also sensitive to some other gases . In order to obtain high selectivity for sensing gaseous substances, gas microchromatography has been attempted by applying micromachining technologies . This method has some disadvantages, however, such as low response and structural complication. Fig. 10 presents the selectivity of the SrCO3 sensor based on CL to a number of gases with the same concentration of 1000 ppm. It can be seen that the sensor exhibits a significantly high selectivity to ethanol. Under the optimized conditions, it is very interesting to note that there was no response of the sensor while gasoline, ammonia or hydrogen passing over the CL detection system. There are three possibilities: firstly, no reaction happens between sample gases with SrCO3; secondly, no CL was produced although sample gases can react with SrCO3; and thirdly, emitted CL signal is too weak to be detected under the optimized conditions mentioned before. To n-hexane, the interfering would not be obvious since its lower sensitivity than ethanol.
In order to check the stability and durability of this sensor, one experiment was carried out by continuously introducing 2000 ppm ethanol vapor to the sensor at 380 °C with the flow rate of 300 ml/min. The CL intensity was measured at the bandpass of 425 nm. The result shows that, after 100 h reaction, no obvious change can be found. The RSD (n=17) during the 100 h reaction is about 1.02%, which means that the sensor keeps the same response to ethanol vapor. As shown in Fig. 11 , the lifetime of TiO2 as the sensing material has also been studied in our previous work . It can be seen that, after 60 h reaction, the CL intensity decayed to about one-half of its original brightness. The Raman spectra showed that the carbon originated from the ethanol oxidation decreased the catalytic activity by depositing on the surface of TiO2, but can be removed in air by controlling the temperature at 500 °C for 3 h. As compared with the TiO2, the present SrCO3 sensor shows better stability and durability.
For the study of CL mechanism of the SrCO3 sensor, GC experiments were carried out to detect the intermediates of the catalytic oxidation of ethanol. As in the case of ethanol vapor, it is well known that there are two oxidation states of ethanol. C2H5OH+12O2→CH3CHO+H2O C2H5OH→C2H4+H2O The first reaction shown in Eq. (3) is a process initiating the oxidation by the dehydrogenation to CH3CHO intermediate and the second reaction in Eq. (4) is initiated by the dehydration to C2H4. The intermediates products, acetaldehyde and ethylene will then be subsequently converted to carbon dioxide and water. The GC chromatogram (shown in Fig. 12A ) for the ethanol oxidation on SrCO3 at 350 °C approves the given statement. It can be seen that there are three peaks corresponding to C2H4, CH3CHO and C2H5OH, respectively, which can be identified by comparison of the retention time of the standard gases in GC. Fig. 12B shows that with the temperature increasing, the content of the products from the ethanol oxidation on SrCO3 changed. The peak height of GC chromatogram corresponds to the content of this compound in the products. It can be seen that ethanol was mostly converted into ethylene in the high temperature regions, and mostly transformed to acetaldehyde in the low temperature regions. It also shows that with the conversion of ethanol improved in high temperature, the CL intensity also increased. This result can be used to explain the phenomenon that the CL intensity increased with the increasing temperature as shown in Fig. 7.
In order to test the real CL procedure, C2H4 and CH3CHO were directly introduced into the sensor to see if the same emission is produced. CL was observed while C2H4 or CH3CHO passing through the SrCO3 sensor. Fig. 13 shows temperature dependence of the relative CL intensity measured at 425 nm from the oxidation of CH3CHO and C2H4 on SrCO3, and the conversion of them after passing through the SrCO3 sensor, respectively. It can be seen that the CL intensity and conversion of this two gases increases with the temperature increasing, which is same with that of ethanol. This is to say, the CL phenomenon from the catalytic oxidation of ethanol on SrCO3 can be attributed to the oxidation processes of the two intermediates originated from the ethanol oxidation, as shown in the following Scheme 1 .Different from the report by Nakagawa and coworkers , another way resulted in CL was found besides the oxidation of C2H4 shown in Eqs. (1) and (2). For comparison, the CL spectra of C2H5OH, CH3CHO and C2H4 on SrCO3 at 400 °C were measured, respectively. Fig. 14 shows that in the short wavelength region, the CL spectra of the three gases are similar to each other, and the CL from C2H5OH in long wavelength region shall owe to that from CH3CHO. This is to say, the CL emission processes of ethylene and acetaldehyde oxidized on SrCO3 are different. However, the electronically excited intermediate is still unknown according to the results. In fact, electronically excited formaldehyde, (HCHO)∗, has been confirmed as a chemiluminescing species common to all the ozone–olefin reactions in terms of the gas-phase Criegie mechanism . Furthermore, HCHO as the major intermediate from the oxidation of ethylene by O3 was observed at reaction times of ∼130 ms by utilizing photoionizaiton mass spectrometer . However, no peak of HCHO appeared after C2H4 passing through the SrCO3 sensor in our experiment. Also, the intermediate product of HCHO was not mentioned during the course of ethanol oxidation on γ-Al2O3 in the literatures . According to the GC analysis, we found that HCHO as the intermediate originated from ethanol can easily be oxidized to CO2 by SrCO3. Accordingly, the existing lifetime of HCHO is so short that it cannot be transferred into the GC instrument. To CH3CHO oxidation, no other peak was observed in GC chromatogram except the peak of acetaldehyde. The CL phenomenon observed during the oxidation of acetaldehyde by O3 has also been reported, which was attributed to vibrationally excited OH . But the CL spectrum measured from 500 to 1100 nm in the literature is different from that measured from 400 to 560 nm at 400 °C in the study. Further work is required to identify the radical intermediates and explain the formation of them.
A novel alcohol sensor based on nanosized SrCO3 in this article was firstly developed according to the generated CL from catalytic oxidation of ethanol. The simple sensor presents rapid response to ethanol vapor and is easy to operate. Wide linear response, high sensitivity, and satisfied stability show promise of this sensor for ethanol determination. This sensor also showed high selectivity to ethanol, and no interference was observed by gasoline, ammonia and hydrogen. No consumption of sensor substrate signifies the long lifetime of the gas sensor. The excellent performance surely makes the SrCO3 sensor 1 suitable for any situation where there is need for ethanol detection in areas such as breath checker and industry monitor. Also, the work is potential for the development of nanosensor based on a couple of nanoparticles, which would make the miniaturize equipment utilizing CL possible.