,0
question,Q: How does P. falciparum gene expression change with aging for male and female organisms?
full_answer,"Question: Q: How does P. falciparum gene expression change with aging for male and female organisms?

Options:
A) Gene expression decreases as P. falciparum ages for both males and females with aging.
B) Gene expression increases for P. falciparum males and decreases for females with aging.
C) Gene expression decreases for P. falciparum males and increases for females with aging.
D) Insufficient information to answer this question
E) Gene expression increases as P. falciparum ages for both males and females with aging.

Gene expression in Plasmodium falciparum parasites changes with aging, but it is not uniform across both male and female organisms. According to the context, for typically distinct strains within the same host, long-read scRNA-seq data revealed transcriptional differences between them (Sunil2024 pages 1-1). Furthermore, gene expression patterns change as gametocytes mature across late sex modules L1 to L5 (Sunil2024 pages 4-4), indicating that age affects gene expression in P. falciparum.

Specifically, some genes increase in transcriptional dimorphism earlier than at the point of bifurcation, while others are shared between developing gametocytes prior to sexual bifurcation but maintain their expression only along male (L3) or female (L4) lineages following bifurcation. This suggests that gene expression changes with age for both males and females, but in a strain-specific manner.

Given the information provided in the context, it is not accurate to say that gene expression increases as P. falciparum ages for both males and females with aging (option E). However, based on the data presented, it appears that gene expression changes with age, particularly between late sex modules L1 to L5.

ANSWER SUMMARY: Gene expression in Plasmodium falciparum parasites changes with aging, but specific patterns vary across male and female organisms.

References

1. (Sunil2024 pages 1-1): Sunil Kumar Dogga et al. ""Single-cell Atlas of Sexual Development in Plasmodium falciparum."" Science, https://www.science.org/.

Note: As the article does not have a specific DOI or page numbers, and was only accessed in 2024, this citation format is used according to MLA guidelines for online sources without access information.

2. (Sunil2024 pages 4-4): Sunil Kumar Dogga et al. ""Single-cell Atlas of Sexual Development in Plasmodium falciparum."" Science, https://www.science.org/.

Note: As the article does not have a specific DOI or page numbers, and was only accessed in 2024, this citation format is used according to MLA guidelines for online sources without access information.
"
answer_letter,B
ground_truth,Gene expression decreases as P. falciparum ages for both males and females with aging.
result,1
timestamp,2024-12-09 00:54:58
